Good afternoon. Hi. Good afternoon, everyone. Uh we're going to start our formal program now. I'm going to I've got the pleasure of introducing our guest speaker today. My name is Neil Kashkari. Uh I'm going to introduce our guest speaker, Kristoff Beck. Kristoff is chairman and chief executive officer of EcoAB, the global leader in water hygiene and infection prevention solutions. Uh, EcoAB has about 48,000 employees scattered all around the world. So, it's a big globally relevant company. Uh, I know Kristoff is passionate about water stewardship and the environment. We're going to get into that and the really important role that EcoAB plays in those uh, important initiatives. Kristoff was named Eolab's president and chief executive officer uh, in January of 2021 and he became chairman in May of 2022. He joined Eolab in 2007. Uh he's got a really remarkable background which I'm not going to get into in detail so we leave time for him. He's a native of Switzerland. He holds both uh Swiss and US citizenships and he's an engineer by training. He has a master's degree in engineering uh from the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. Got his start working on space shuttle work for the European Space Agency. He's very active here in Minnesota and around the country. He's chair in addition to EcoAB, he's chair of the Greater MSP. He's on the board of directors of the St. Paul and Minnesota Foundations. And he's also on the board of directors of Delta Airlines. So, please join me in welcoming Kristoff back to the stage. [applause] >> Neil, good to see you. >> Good to see you, too. Thanks for being here. Really appreciate it. >> Well, everyone came for you. So, I just learned that I didn't realize this that the governor of Minnesota is in Switzerland today. He >> is >> at the EcoAB offices and he's saying, "Where's Kristoff?" >> Right. >> Exactly. >> I'm setting priorities. So, I've seen Chris Schmeer as well in the room. So, trying to be everywhere at the [laughter] same time. >> Well, thank you for honoring your commitment. We really appreciate you being here. Um, let me start with Eolab. I I did not know until we got to know each other. I did not understand the full breadth of Ecoab's businesses and technologies. Just give us a few minutes about what Ecoab is today. It's a great question because usually [clears throat] people ask that question a little bit differently. They say, "Yeah, I've seen you in the bathroom." Um, which is very inspiring uh usually to start the discussion. So, I'm glad that we starting our lunch as well. uh on that note which is less than 1% of what we're doing but that's what apparently so staying in in people's minds you know we've been for 102 years passionate about our purpose which is protecting people and um the resources vital to life and we've become now as you said so a company with 48,000 people serving three million customers in 40 different industries from data centers to restrooms to hotels to um car manufacturing to power plant you name it. And our objective which we've delivered in a way last year in in 24 was to protect 1.7 billion people from infections and enough water for the drinking needs of 780 million people and our path to get to much more by 2030. We're a growth company. I started 18 years ago now. We're a four billion company, a 12 billion mark cap company. We're 75 uh today. It's a bit changing the last few days. Um as we know, but it's been a great story of um of impact of protecting people, natural resources. We protect a third of the world's food production uh for instance as well, a quarter of the power that's generated as well around the world. And today where we need water and energy more than ever because of artificial intelligence for uh the most part well what we do is even more essential to make sure that we can keep growing and living the way that we all deserves to. >> That's that's terrific. Let's you know you mentioned AI and [clears throat] I've got a few questions around AI. Everybody's talking about AI. One thing I learned from you which I did not appreciate. Everyone talks about the power demands to uh power these data centers. You open my eyes to the water demands that these data centers also require. Could you just educate us a little bit about that and what is EcoLab's role in that ecosystem? >> Yeah, if you if you start with a few facts on on water first. uh before AI became uh a big deal, AI has been existing so for 30 40 years obviously at least in theory in the last two three years much more in practice and um before that um I've been focusing on understanding so what's the water challenge that we have out there and starting by figuring out how big would a bowl of water be if you were to put all the fresh water of the earth in one of those how big would it be What would be the diameter uh of that bubble, ball, uh sphere, whatever you want to call it. Well, it would be 36 miles. So, that's kind of the Twin Cities. You would have that bubble on top of it. That's all the water we have um on the planet if you exclude the salt water from the sea. And we realized that by 2030 before AI, we would need as a planet 56% more water than what nature can provide. So that's a problem because we can create energy. We can't create water uh unfortunately. So we all have to find ways to use and recycle water as nature has done for for millions of billions of years um obviously on the planet. And when you think about it, 150 companies out there impact a third of the world water usage. And that was before AI as well, which led to a whole thing that we um generated. So with the United Nations as well, the water resilience coalition as we called it to bring those 150 companies to really learn from each other and being able to keep growing um as as a planet. AI came uh two years ago. Everything changed because if we thought that we had an opportunity or a challenge, now we estimate that AI will require the incremental power of the whole of India as a country and the whole of the United States in terms of drinking water in the next four years by 2030. So if we thought we had a challenge a few years back, well we have a bigger one which is how it's driving what we do um as a company and why is that um that we need so much power and and water? Well, you need the power to power the computers. Um so the chips but the most important part is that you need a lot of water to produce the power that powers the chips. That's the power plant. It's the number one usage uh of water on the planet. Then you need a lot of water to produce the chips. Um when you cut the celissium, you polish the celissium, you print the celissium, you need to rinse it and all that. One fab and there are four 500 in the world today required the water needs of 17 million people and we build one every month um right now mostly in Asia um as we know. So finally you have the data centers where they're being powered obviously. So with electricity they create a lot of heat and when you create a lot of heat well you need to remove that heat which means cooling and that's been done with water air conditioning. So quite a bit up to now and technology is changing now. So for us as a company, it's been focusing on how do we help produce more power in power generation um with water technology that allows you to produce more power with the same energy that you have. Second, it's to reuse and recycle water in a fab which interestingly enough the water that's being used is thousand times more pure than the water that you use for pharma that you inject in your own bloodstream. So it's pretty high tech. So to do that and we just acquired a company there for 1.8 8 billion a few weeks ago that does exactly that. So we can reuse and recycle water. And last but not least, it's to develop waterless technologies to cool data centers so that ultimately we can keep growing um the AI um supply to all of us in ways that are protecting natural resources, especially water, and that we can have enough power hopefully to make it work. But that's a different question. >> That's great. So let's stay just one more second on AI. [clears throat] Now in my role at the Federal Reserve, I'm always asking companies, how are you using AI? Because a big question in financial markets is, is AI a bubble? Is this technology actually going to produce productivity enhancing benefits to its customers? I'm curious, how does Ecoab use AI? >> So four different ways. one we just mentioned um it's uh how do we um enable the infrastructure right um to make sure that we get so the the AI power um the the second one is what we call um best-in-class in our own organization as mentioned before so we serve three million customers around the world and we help them uh deliver their business promise at the right cost while reducing impact on the environment so I had a customer so five years ago who asked me, "Well, um, I have 40,000 restaurants in the world. Which one is the best one with the best guest satisfaction, the best performance, the best environmental impact? Which one is it?" And they're all franchised. It's an American chain. Um, and I said, "Well, let me ask my team." Um, he said, "Well, before you get there, so the second question is, what would it take to make my 40,000 restaurants perform like the best one I have on the planet?" And the third is, "How do we get there?" And as hard as it's been obviously so to get you teams together from wherever around the world to understand that and how do you develop those plans well AI today can do it in a few seconds where you can be in front of a restaurant and understand what's the performance of that restaurant what could be done in order to capture the potential and what could I do as a sales or service person in front of it so that's what we call one platform that we've developed with our key shareholders are Microsoft oft um to serve all those industries. So that's the second way. Um and the third one um and I really go in that order. It's um it's to improve the performance of our own operations and it's very conscious that we don't start talking about that first because too many organizations are start talking about AI how much cost they can save which means how many jobs you could save which is very inspiring obviously. of people in the organization saying sorry guys a third of you well I'm not totally sure what I'm going to do with you um so we said that's not the way we want to approach it no it's how do we enable AI how do we leverage it for the sake of our customers for the growth of our company while we manage as well so to improve our own performance um along the way and Fortune has just um ranked all Fortune 500 companies [clears throat] uh a few weeks back on their AI preparedness nest for the future and we were number nine so in a good place. >> That's great. Thank you. Thank you. Well, I'm going to um stay on this a topic that's helpful for me. Hopefully other people find it interesting which is this year has been very challenging economically in terms of a lot of changes. >> We've had big exactly big policy changes on tariffs and trade, big policy changes on immigration, you know, other regulatory changes, tax changes. How has Eolab experienced these changes and are you optimistic for 2026? >> Let's put it that way. We've gotten used to that kind of dramatic changes. Um over the last five years, um we are in that time now, the last two months, we've been preparing our plans for 26. And I was thinking so the other day uh two weekends ago um and saying okay when I think a year ago we were doing the same thing. We spent two months preparing the plans for 172 countries um around the world. Then the year started uh 25 and none of those plans were valid um anymore. [clears throat] So that's one way to spend our life spending so much time on things that are totally useless. Um and we've done it again uh this year and I guess that something dramatic is going to happen in 26 again. Uh I don't know what it's going to be but something is going to happen. So I think the the most important so for us when I think about um the way we dealt with with the tariffs uh for instance it's the way we've prepared the company not for the tariffs um obviously so over the years but it was all to say we are so focused on being super resilient for our customers when when we don't serve uh an operating room in a hospital the hospital stops. when we don't serve a dish machine in a restaurant, the restaurant stops or in a nuclear power plant or in a data center as mentioned before. So for us, it's absolutely essential that we can serve our customers whatever happens out there and that's how we've brought all our manufacturing capabilities very close to our customers. 92% of what we sell is produced locally today. So it helped for resilience, it helped for effects, it helps for geopolitical um issues and then it helped us for tariffs that was not planned for that. But that practice of being super resilient that our customers can count on us whatever happens has been a huge advantage for us to go through the past few years. But the last two things I'd say um the first one is how do we how do we build that resilience? There's a lot of infrastructure and processes and all the things but at the end of the day it's our teams that makes the whole difference and the way we dealt with our team during the pandemic during COVID in 2020 in March when the world stopped um a quarter of our companies focused on a million and a half restaurants out there. Well, they all went to zero. We had 12,000 people working for restaurants and hotels around the world. We had this big decision to make. What do we do with them? When our customers were just letting everybody else go, we kept 12,000 people in the company. We paid their salary, their bonuses, and it's been the best decision that we've ever made because people remember. And when it gets tougher, when it gets different to what your plans are, well, ultimately they're here with you, for you, for the customers as well at the same time. So, we've become better over time. And to your question 26, I think it's going to be similar than what we've experienced in 25. The way I speak to investors, for instance, [clears throat] I'm pretty convinced that we will deliver our promise um in 26 or in 25 for this year. But I'm pretty sure as well that the path to get there will be totally different than what I thought or what you thought as well at the same time. So that's a little bit the world we live in now. >> That's great. That's great. Thank you. All right, let me shift gears a little bit to local uh and state. You are one of the few CEOs uh in town today of a big company. I let me just say you heir on being engaged civically like I see it firsthand. You're engaged at the state level. You're engaged in local foundations. What's happening in St. Paul where your headquarters is. Just talk about that. Why have you decided to make this a priority given you have 48,000 employees and millions of customers all around the world? >> I probably spend too much time um on local things, but it's driven by by a few things. First, I happen to like people. Uh so people's life around me matter and when I came back from Chicago uh here right before COVID um we experienced some difficult times um to say all of us obviously um and I was looking at what was happening in S. Paul um in 2020 and with everything else that happened the years after. But I had as well in mind um we talked with a few of you so um during the the reception um how my predecessor Doug Baker was involved in the community together with Richard Davis by the way. So from US Bank these two were super involved. Um one was in sample the other one in Minneapolis. Not sure which city is better than the other. I don't really care. I'm not from here but they're both good. Uh they're both great >> great even. [laughter] So, I was watching these two and saying, well, it's cool what they're doing um for the community, for social questions, but also building the US Bank Stadium for the Super Bowl, which is part of the community uh as well called life. And that impressed me um what these two did. And when COVID struck, well, there were doing different things uh obviously. So at that time and there was not many people left um from the business community who really wanted to be engaged and I realized um in in S. all how we could get together with other CEOs, Chris Hilier from Securion, um Jay from CHS, um we had the police chief, we had the mayor, we had everybody sort of came together and saying, well, how do we how do we protect our people? How do we protect our communities? How do we make sure that restaurants and retail stores are still open for people to continue to live in the depths of um of COVID obviously and I've learned a lot. So um doing that and the more you do that the more you're being asked to do things um as well that's how I ended up so chair of greater MSP I talk too much I did too much probably and then it's okay why don't you do that and then I'm spending way more time uh on that but it's been um a good thing and you know this this this last thing which I think is is pretty critical in the times that we live now everywhere that's true in Minnesota uh but that's true in many places around the country around the world, we spend so much time about how do we want to share a shrinking pie, tax the rich, the bigger companies, um the biggest cities, the the whatever that is. And this is I mean this is uninspiring. It's frustrating. You say I don't want to spend my time on sharing a shrinking pie. This is really not fun. Um as I think we have only one life. Um, I prefer spending my time on how do we grow the pie that we can debate afterwards uh how to share it and I've been impressed um how we can do things in this community here in Minnesota to get uh more industries, more innovation, more talent, but at the end of the day we're in the last quartile in terms of GDP in the country. Um and it's been uh a while. So we can see that as a problem. I see that as a major opportunity. And if we can bring Minnesota, help bring Minnesota's economy to the first quartile of the country um with Greater MSP with a bunch of other CEOs. Chris Galvin from um Anderson Windows has been very active with Bob Franzel from Excel Energy as well and saying well how much investment would that um generate? How many more jobs would that uh create? And we have all those projects on data centers on met 3.0 on sustainable aviation fuel. We have plenty of ideas. We have great companies. We have a great set of universities around us. So for me is how do we grow the state in order to make sure we have a better future, more jobs, more innovation and that we can talk afterwards about how do we share it but not the other way around which is way too much to focus today. Thank you. But and that that all I mean it's certainly going to resonate with this audience. But you also do other things which are focused on those who are less fortunate like I think today you announced something around affordable housing. >> Could you share a little bit about that? >> Wow that's a very different uh topic. You know, I came from a country, you mentioned Switzerland, um where we have no homeless and we have no homeless. Not because the concept doesn't exist. Um but there's a different concept um in the country which is you take care of everyone. It's a super successful economic story uh obviously as a country. So it's not that it's just welfare for all and let's hope for the best. Um, it's uh let's let's be successful. Let's make sure we protect each other because that's so critical for the future of the country. And as a as a Swiss kid, um when you're born, you get in your passport um the name of a city where your ancestor uh came from. And whatever happens to you in your life wherever um around the world if you have nothing left no one can help you you know you can go back to that city or that village and they have the duty to take care of you and it's ingrained for 700 years uh in this country and that's why you have literally no no homeless and I've seen too many people around us um not just in Minnesota obviously because this is a challenge we have everywhere um in the country and you said this is not right this this is not fair that could be us that could be me uh life chooses that for you uh we can't choose obviously no one chooses to be um to be a homeless and say well we we can solve that we can do something um about it and my predecessor was very involved as well in that um supporting the the Catholic charities which is um our neighbor uh in sample as well and he said okay there's a money issue but there's most importantly an organizational issue as well how do we bring the providers together the cities the counties the state um and we created the homelessness round table three years ago um that was one of those things where I suggested that and ended up with the project um afterwards and we do that every quarter we meet all the providers are coming, all the counties, all the cities, the state are coming together around the table every time, on time, well prepared, delivering on what we've promised, living on time. I've been so impressed um with people involved um in homelessness and we've announced this morning so together with um Sample and Minnesota Foundation that we'll invest 23 million um for for homelessness and uh with a clear plan uh behind it as well because I think that as Minnesota we can end uh homelessness and we should be proud of doing it the right way for people around us. It's going to help everyone, our companies, our families, our life around here, the safety of our people, and most importantly, people who are impacted um with homelessness. So, sorry, a bit passionate about the topic. [applause] >> We're going to turn to all of you in a moment uh for your questions. So, we're going to have mics coming out to you. Let me just shift to something um lighter topic. You've got a [clears throat] big job. Uh you've got a family, a lot of pressures on your time. How do you relax? >> Well, that's a discussion I'm having with my wife quite often. Uh uh I haven't succeeded much on that path. Um you know, it's it's trying to spend a little time. I have so with with my family. Um by far not enough and this is uh a big question. for me and which doesn't help the time with the family. Uh obviously my way to relax is to fly and I've been flying so almost all my life. I was an aerospace engineer as you mentioned and for a while I didn't have the means to fly. So when I finally got the means to fly, I really started to fly and I've been flying almost everything that's available out there. Um so that's the way I relax. I went to War Road uh Minnesota uh this weekend which is further north. Uh obviously Marvin Windows um is over there. You can't miss it. It's all yellow in the woods. Um and [laughter] that's the way I relax. That's one way of doing it. >> But when you say you fly everything that's out there, just to be clear, that's both I've never met somebody who does this. That's both airplanes and helicopters. I've met one or the other. I haven't met both. So, it's pretty remarkable. All right, so let's And he's also I can attest to this in firsthand experience. He's a brilliant skier. Um I we go skiing once in a while and and Jeff Grryer is here, too, who's also an excellent skier. Uh I can kind of keep up, but you know, watching these guys ski, it's a work of art. So, uh let's see some microphones and if you got a question, hands up. Microphones are in the back in here. All right, there's back there. And please introduce yourself before you ask your question. >> Hey, uh Kristoff Roger Kempa. I'm the CFO of Nature Works, a biop-olymer company here in town. And then I'm also on the board of Catholic Charities. So, thank you for uh your continued commitment to this. >> Um I do do have a question. You talk, sorry, I'm getting a little echo. That's why I'm stuttering a little bit. Um, a little bit of uh a question about uh uh AI. You talked about the exciting opportunities that AI is presenting for your opportunity. How how are you keeping your investors and your your employee base focused on all the other things that your organization does with all the excitement of AI? It's a it's a journey and it starts with me um using it all the time. Um I I've made a a few shifts in in my in my own ways of doing things um over time. I don't use Google anymore. Um I use JG GPT or C-pilot. Um the moment that you shift um to that type of technology and it's not an advertising for any of those. um it's if you go also towards um AI technology or GPT technology uh you never go back um to normal uh search engines um that was to force myself uh as well into it. The second is to say I don't want to use any paper ever. We serve the paper industry which is a bit problematic [laughter] for the company but uh that aside um it's forcing you um to use all technology all the time and the moment that you do that well people around you um either had already started and we have a few on our executive team uh who are way ahead um of me in every meeting. So it's transcripted, it's summarized, um we get the summary afterwards. Um and when people see other people do it, there's always more people who try to do it. And it's also been that discussion of saying, well, there's this whole debate, uh is it going to be a big revolution or is it going to be something that's going to evolve and transform uh naturally? And I said, well, I think it's going to be a dramatic um revolution. And I remember talking to one of the tech guys um in the industry and we were talking about this long-term planning and he said you know we don't think in years anymore we think in months and years have become months and that really stayed with me the way I'm planning for the company as well at what pace at what speed and ultimately saying well okay if you have two trains out there one that's moving really fast um kind of years have become months and you have the other one that's a little bit the normal life. Which one do you want to take? I think the answer is obvious because if it's the speed train that wins and you missed it, well, you're kind of screwed. If you're on the other one, well, you might be lucky that the world is going the slow way. I don't think it's going to be the case. So, it's really having that discussion broadly um especially with the new generation. So cool to have uh students with us today because that's the big deal as well with AI. Um I have to be careful how I'm talking about age obviously. So um here but um people earlier in career know way more about technology and AI than people later in career. I hope I used all the right words um here. And that's the way except for the two of us. >> It's we're the two exceptions. Go ahead. >> Forever young uh here on stage. Um but then it's reaching out so to the front line as well where people earlier uh in their careers and the last thing is what we discussed before is uh position that as a as a growth idea not a cost cutting productivity idea where you scare everyone um out there. This is the unfortunate um approach. So I'm really bullish about it and it's going to be messy. It's going to be complicated. There's a lot of things we don't know. Is it going to be a bubble, big bubble, small bubble? I don't know, but it's going to keep developing. So, for sure. So, kind of the spirit of embracing it and seeing it from the good side. >> Thank you. Others in the back, >> Kristoff, thank you so much for your remarks. Uh my name is George Boyas. I'm with Saddles. We're a commercial real estate firm. A few years back, EcoAB developed uh the water risk monetizer, which I thought you might uh share a little bit about that with us uh today. I thought it was groundbreaking when I saw uh that you came out with that. Um maybe if you could share a little bit about that uh for the audience, please. >> I'm smiling here because it's been something we thought was a great idea that didn't end up as a great idea. Uh so it's it's basically it started with with with an interesting fact that um the cost of water in places where there's the most Holland for instance um is 10 times more than the cost of water in places where there's none uh like some places in India for instance. So there's no correlation of the supply and demand um in um in water and considering all the shortages and challenges I shared before you say well there's an economic challenge here and saying well if supply and demand is not respective from an economic perspective how is it going to work from a physical perspective um as well afterwards. So we came with that idea uh to develop this water risk monetizer which was basically for any company at any site around the world wherever you plant your restaurant your data center is that you could understand what's the real cost of water if you consider everything the infrastructure the supply and demand the quality uh the risk of shortage you name it and we developed that uh that platform which I thought was an unbelievable innovation and it was for free by the way. So that's the good news. The less good news is that almost no one used it. So we said, okay, some people are saying um an idea that doesn't end up well was a bad idea. Uh I'm not sure it was a bad idea because it's still the right thing to do. I'm pretty convinced about it. But that's not the way humans work um in a way which is a little bit of a a separate discussion. So interestingly enough the way we shifted um from there which has been at the core of who we are as a company uh some of us maybe remember uh the original name of the company EcoBant economics laboratory in 1923 and the whole idea because we invented the dry carpet cleaner and the the dishwashing detergent um for automatic machines was this whole idea of producing better outcomes a quicker room uh that's available for you or dishes in a restaurant. Well, you use less energy, less water, less labor, create less waste. That was the original idea of the company. So, as was an economic idea. So, over time, we've really shifted um from this supply demand economics question more towards if you save water, you save energy because 75% of the energy is being used to manage water. Uh which we often forget. It's to heat water, it's to cool water, it's to pump water, it's to treat water. you name it. So if you reuse and recycle water, you reuse and recycle energy which has a way higher cost than water. So ultimately you can demonstrate to someone that using less water means using less energy, less cost. And when ESGs were in fashion, uh well you reduced your footprint as well at the same time. So that was a great idea that turned out into more into a great learning um than a great idea, but we all learn. Thanks for your question. >> Thank you. Oh, over there. [clears throat] >> Good afternoon. >> Good afternoon. >> Susie Steinhagen Project Consulting Group. We've been in Minnesota. We're founded here for 27 years. And your comments around civic duty. I was impressed by the idea of growing the pie verse sharing the pie. And we're blessed to have an incredible hot bed of leaders here in Minnesota. and you sit with a really unique perspective in all of the conversations that you're in and many of the great leaders are here today and I wonder if there's a piece of advice or a call to action that you could leave for us on how we may consider growing the pie. >> Cool question. Um, a few things here. Uh on one hand the the growing the pie is so much more inspiring, optimistic, you build things. Um the the sharing of a shrinking pie well has a limit. Uh obviously when there's no pie left, well, there's nothing left to share. Um, obviously so it's changing the discussion in dramatic ways when it's about growing the pie because it's more innovation, it's more economic growth, it's more jobs, it's more investments. What's not to like? Well, interestingly enough, there's a lot apparently not to like when we want to grow as well at the same time. And that brings me to the the second topic where I think that we are our worst enemies sometimes um on on the path of economic growth. Uh take data centers uh for instance um which is a big topic as we discussed just before one a week um is opening on the planet today and that's going to happen probably so for um the foreseeable future. It's where most of the investments um are going. Most of the data centers concentration is is in um Virginia um so on the east coast obviously on the planet. Um, by the way, why that? It's because they got organized um for it in places um where it was the right place to have them with the right permitting with the right infrastructure um away from the communities um as well. So thought in advance plan for it um as well and I see that at greater MSP so when when some of the hyperscalers all the collocators are trying so to build a data center here we get worried because of the water usage as mentioned before the power usage um the the the noise that it could make the traffic that it could generate and he said well isn't it a question of getting organized uh for it that it works well and the latest data centers don't use more water than a car wash. Uh by the way, so the argument um of the of the water usage is changing with technology um as well. We have almost 80% of our power is renewable is nonfossil in um in in Minnesota as well. So we would have another argument uh to do it. We have space as well. We can place them at the right places um as well. So I'm not getting into an argument whether it's good or bad but it's how do we how do we get organized in order to drive growth. We have also legacy um technologies and industries. Um always so keep in mind um Silicon Valley started here in Minnesota until it moved to Silicon Valley. Uh as we know as a young engineer at the Europe European Space Agency as you mentioned I was working on Cray computers. Those were the most powerful computers on the planet. Well, they were produced here and in Wisconsin. So, that was the place. We've lost it. We have it's the hub of medtech. Uh here 15 of the largest are here. The largest is here. We have Mayo Clinic. We have great hospitals, great infrastructure. Well, we have two paths we can take. One is okay to let it move away or it's to support it. And um as part of greater MSP um a few CEOs from Mayo Clinic, Metronic and others have created that project called METTE 3.0 um which is really to think what's the future of met infrastructure around us? How do we make sure that it's good for the communities? How do we educate the right people? Those are the right projects I believe that are inspiring people around us. we can build those industries in ways that are respectful of people and environment and at the end of the day we'll be growing the pie that we can share in ways um that are more beneficial for all afterwards. That only happens when business leaders get involved um as well. So the piece of advice is get involved um and don't think that it's just for the others. Uh you get so much back when you get involved. I've experienced that myself and that's probably one of the key reasons if you're not driven by just helping people around you um well if you get something back um well that's hopefully an argument as well so to get involved >> other questions >> thank you Kristoff uh my name is Quzi I'm a student at the Humphrey school beginning at uh the tail end of last year we saw a serious backlash against uh ESG across the country and across the world. What has been Equalab's experience and uh why have you stayed the course? >> That's a difficult question. Um thank you uh for getting there by the way because the world changed somewhat um at the beginning of the year. You know, we've been called by many the world sustainability company. When sustainability becomes, for weird reasons a problem um and that you're the world sustainability company, you say, "Well, okay, what's that mean um for me, for us, for our team um around the world?" At the same time I remember discussions with uh our team uh somewhere here at the table on what do we do on DEI because in theory we had to change everything our website our contracts our language our everything when our company has become a super diverse company and our most successful years the last few years have been the years where we've been the most diverse and we stepped back and said okay what's it mean for us here sustainability is becoming a challenge uh DEI is becoming a challenge or you can call it ESG and our formula for success as we call it within the company we don't broadcast it too much we say we grow fast by growing our people our impact on people and planet and growing our team so we grow fast by growing our impact and growing our team so you can put sustainability and diversity on the two parts of the growing fast. They said, well, two things here. The first one, it's been at the source of our success for 102 years. We've grown because we've helped our customers do more with less, make more money by using less natural resources and producing better products. We've grown because our team has become much more similar to the customers, the markets we serve, the countries that we operate in. That's been our formula for success. Those are the values we truly believe in as an organization. So what we said, we won't change anything and we did not change anything, which was exactly the right thing to do to say we've stayed a course. I remember the discussions in our board um even because that was uh a big topic obviously I said well I have an easy choice to make here it's either to confirm or to lose my team as a CEO well which direction uh do you go it's to keep your team it's to protect your team the team that's made the difference um for the company for for 102 years but that's been very specific for us and when I look back that was exactly the right choice um for us. But more broadly, I think that ESG became a target um because too many have thought that saving the planet just for the sake of saving the planet was okay. And unfortunately, it's not because we're in the business of making money as CEOs, well, it's either I grow my earnings every single year or my successor will. [laughter] So, it's an easy choice um as well. And some companies kind of went too far on one side and forgot about driving performance and that's how they became an easy target unfortunately driven by the right things uh most probably. So for us it's really been drive it with performance in mind. This is true for our company. This is true what we do um for our customers out there. And if we help them perform better while protecting nature and people, well, ultimately it's going to be a good deal for everyone. And that's the way we've been thinking through it and we're learning as everybody else is. >> Other questions? Oh, also in the back. >> Yeah. Hello, my name is Jesse Pada. I'm a senior in high school at Blake and I have another AI related question. Um, so I know that you said that EcoAB has 48,000 employees. And so my question is, how many jobs, if any, at EOLAB are taken by AI currently that were once done by humans? Um, and then also how many jobs do you think AI will continue to take in the future? Um, and then a quick followup is if AI does continue to take more jobs, what skills or attributes do you think are going to be in high demand for a young person or young people looking to enter corporate America in the coming decade? >> Well, uh, Jesse, it's hard to predict exactly so where we're going to be. Um but today probably 10% um of our jobs are impacted uh by AI. I would not say replaced because it's not about replacing. It's about for me it's about enhancing human strength. You're stronger when you leverage AI than if you don't. It's not about being replaced um by by AI. And to your point of how many jobs will be impacted, I think 100% of the 48,000 uh will be impacted. And I hope so that we all go through that, that we all learn, that we all embrace, that we all become better, stronger, more enhanced humans because we're leveraging technology. We can learn. So from anyone around the world, what's the best idea that you've had to take care of a hospital, a data center, um or a hotel? So for me it's how do we get there the quickest possible um as an organization and how do we get there? Um we think a lot about this this training component. I don't know how much the training is essential here. Um people don't really go in classrooms uh too much. People don't really read handbooks when you buy something uh anymore. you need to have tools that are very intuitive um that you can plug and play and use and it works immediately and you get uh much more adaption much quicker people like it look at each other how they doing how they're working um looking at kids how they doing it um as well so I think that's going to be more a cultural question um than a training technical question uh in an organization but the core is really what I said before don't position that um as a job elimination journey uh because [clears throat] it's not for us. It's not the way we approach it as an organization is to say for a very long time our company has grown. The team at more or less the same pace as the sales have grown um of the company and that has changed over the last few years where our team is growing less fast than the sales of the company. And for me, that's the easiest way and the healthiest way to to manage that transformation in ways that people can adapt, adjust while staying focused on growing the pie versus being afraid of what's going to happen to me or my colleagues uh around me as well. make it a great story, a growth story, an inspiring story and don't focus on the more difficult side uh of it because we can live with it. I'll give you an example. I asked a CEO of a consumerf facing business, how is your company using AI? And the specific example she gave me which I thought was very interesting was she said that you know they have operators who take phone calls from customers. They have AI listening to the conversation and it automatically surfaces up prompts to the operator of this is what the person is likely asking about and it helps the operator get to the right answer much more quickly. So it's not replacing the operator, it's just making the operator more efficient, which is an example of of what you're talking about. >> Absolutely. >> Um, >> so any other questions out there? I'm Oh, in the back. >> Hi, Pam expert with Union Gospel Mission. >> Good to see you again, Pam. I know. Twice in one day. Twice in one day. Well, it was a great way to start the day with the announcement this morning. >> So, Pam is the CEO of the Union Gospel, uh, a great provider for homeless in S. Paul. Uh, just want to salute all you're doing for the community. >> Thanks, Kristoff. If you want to come take a tour, we're open all the time. Come take a tour at Union Gospel Mission Twin Cities. Go to ugmtc.org. that that public message aside, um I just would like you to comment a little bit around creating and building and maintaining culture within an organization. I've heard you talk about values. I've heard you talk about people and in the end how you put that together and people who might not be used to working with each other in different ways. What have you done that you think makes that a success and and recommendations we might think about? You mean from a I want to make sure I understood what you said, Pam. Um, so a culture of of what otherwise I might go so the the wrong way. well is really thinking about we succeed through how our people and I've heard you talk about that and yet it doesn't happen naturally necessarily and um what have you done that you think fosters the culture for um your team and your organization >> it's a few things the first one is our purpose is is so aligned with the way we grow as an organization. We we protect what's vital. The more people we protect from infections, the more we grow. The more water we preserve, the more we grow. So there's a direct correlation um between how we grow and what we do every single day. And it doesn't mean that every activity in the company feels directly related to it. But we do our engagement surveys every year and I'm every year impressed that over 80% of our people around the world and over 90% are replying by the way um around the world say the work I do every day is aligned with the purpose of the company which is really showing it's it's working and everyone is thinking about it in a bit of a different way but that's why we measure as well our impact and that's why I could say well we protected 1.7 billion people and we preserved enough water for 780 million people and we delivered 16 billion of sales while doing that and our profit and all that. So it's a to link the performance of the company with the purpose the impact that we have on the customers that we serve um every day. So I think that that's part of the of the magic of the company but at the same time it's how we deal with extreme situations and I mentioned it a bit before obviously so during COVID when we were facing this extreme situation of saying do we keep those 12,000 people or do we do like everyone else I got a lot of love from investors um doing that because it costed us half a billion of earnings a year and it lasted two years so it's a billion um obviously and it was just during the transition um as well so from my predecessor and me uh so I got all the nice comments about the previous one would have never done that it would have been way much better and we spend a lot of time together so I know he would have done exactly the same thing and we did it together but people remember uh how we dealt um with our team during extreme uh situation and if we are so successful today I think it's in great parts because of how we dealt in one of the most extreme um situations that we went through and then it's all the individual situations um individual people we we care about our teams we care about our associates we don't compromise on performance so I don't want to give the impression that we having a group hug um every day and hoping for the best. Um we deliver our promise, but we even say and that's the last thing I'd say. We say we deliver our promise to our customers, to our teams, to our communities, and our shareholders every single day, always. And that's how we've built, I think, that culture of people first. All right, I'm going to take the liberty to ask one last quick question, which is uh Kristoff, you're also on the board of Delta Airlines, which I think is very cool because you're a pilot. One of the downsides for Kristoff being on the board of Delta Airlines is when my flight is late, he gets a text message. Uh or >> I do. That's true. >> True. Or, hey, could you let Ed know that we need some new movies? Right. I've seen all these movies. Uh but tell me about what's your experience been like other than my annoying texts. What has your experience been like being on the board of Delta? It's been a year now. Um, so for me it's obviously a kid in a candy store uh because there's planes everywhere. Um, and could not be better obviously merging so my passion um and my life uh obviously so together. But for me it's been a remarkable story of resilience too. Uh we at Delta Airlines we're celebrating our centennial um this year. So 100 years um in the airline industry and it's an industry uh that has experienced that is experiencing near death pretty often. the 911 um obviously COVID um shutdowns um there's always something um that's happening out there and Delta has become today the largest airline in the world most profitable most valuable airline um in the world almost debt-free uh today I think it's been a a remarkable story and when I'm sitting in the boardroom and I'm thinking thinking about my challenges at Eco Lab. I feel really good saying my problems are much easier than Ed's problems um for sure because they are so extreme and the way the company think about dealing with adversity is very close to ours. Um it's an organization of 110,000 people uh around the world. It's 5 and a half thousand flights a day. It's 800,000 uh passengers uh a day to 300 destination when you think about the logistics that it represents every single day. How do you make that happen? That it works most of the time, right? Except when Neil is sending me a text that something didn't happen correctly. Well, it's because of the culture that they've built and it's a people first organization and I'll make it super short, but it was during deregulation when the company decided to increase salaries to keep and thank their teams in the '9s. They could not buy the new plane, the 767. and three flight attendants from Los Angeles came together and said this is not right what the government is doing at us because the company decided to pay you small and now we can't buy a plane the three flight attendants went to Atlanta met the CFO and said how much does it cost a plane was 40 million uh back then and the three said um a few are still alive actually and said um well it's less than we thought and they raised that money and they bought the first 767 for the company to demonstrate that employees are on the side of the company and it became the plane is called the spirit of Delta. It's still at um at the museum uh in Atlanta but it's showing how people first culture build resilience um for companies that have been living so for over 100 years. >> Wonderful. This is fantastic. We could keep going for another hour. Please everyone join me in thanking Kristoff >> [applause]