https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/speeches/2024/remarks-for-the-national-association-of-corporate-directors-new-england-chapter.aspx

Remarks for the National Association of Corporate Directors New England Chapter

Susan M. Collins

April 16, 2024

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

hi, good afternoon everyone. my name is Beth Boland, I am the chair of the New England chapter of nacd and I am delighted to have us back from the dold drums of the winter to such a wonderful day. we had an in-person program like two weeks ago over at ey for a private group or private director series um with the secretary of Economic Development and John Chester from the globe, which was fantastic, and now we have our next um in-person meeting for public company and private company directors, and what a great, great program we have today. we have been trying to figure out a schedule for Susan Collins to come in for quite a while and we are delighted that we were finally able to reserve this time for her. this will be a great program and it is such an honor to have the first woman president and CEO of the Boston fed, Kathy minahan, who is also our chapter president um be doing the honors for the first president and CEO of color at the Boston fed, and I was talking with them beforehand and I said what I really, really look forward to is the day where none of those descriptors are applied, and it's just the 12th and the 14th presidents of the Boston fed that we have before you. before we start our program, I just want to acknowledge our sponsors. we have a list of our sponsors on the table, um, and I see many of you here tonight, thank you, thank you, you are the lifeblood and on our screen here, um, you're the lifeblood of what makes this chapter tick, and um so many of you provide great speakers and great ideas for these programs. in particular, I want to recognize our Spotlight sponsor for today, which is sidley, one of our newest sponsors of the chapter, and we welcome them into our family. so, um with that, we will now get started with our wonderful fireside chat, um on issues that are couldn't be more timely and more of interest to not only this group but our nation as a whole and our economy as a whole. so, with that, we look forward to hearing your comments, and I'll kick it off to Kathy. thanks so much, Beth. it's wonderful to be here in the Connelly conference room. um brings back so many good memories uh of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and the wonderful people who were there when I was here and who are there now are here now, uh, working with Susan. um, as uh Beth mentioned, um, Susan and I are 12th and 14th or something like that- uh, presidents and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, um, Susan was um appointed in July of 2022. um, I don't know how many of you are really familiar with how much a Reserve Bank does- obviously, monetary policy, and that's an important role. I know that Susan plays on the Federal Open Market Committee, but in addition to that um, the bank uh does economic research in general, banking supervision and financial stability efforts for the First Federal Reserve District and, more broadly, for the country as a whole, Community Economic Development and a wide range of Payments, Technology and finance initiatives. so the Federal Reserve, if people like to think of it, is in terms of the Open Market Committee, but it's a lot more than just that, and I know Susan has a lot of perspectives on the things um that you guys probably aren't interested in but are really important to the Federal Reserve and how it um manages the nation's economy. Susan's an international macro Economist with a lifelong interest in policy and its impact on living standards. she's published widely and serves has served in every position you can imagine of Senior Management at a university- Provost, Dean, Professor, research scholar, board member, um- and she's been involved with University of Michigan, Brookings Institution, Georgetown and Harvard. she graduated from Harvard undergraduate years at Harvard and has her PhD in economics from MIT. so no slouch here, W, and lived in Boston until fairly recently. so well, 199, yeah, that's recent to. we'll take it so, without further Ado, let me turn the podium over to SusanI think that's on. is that on perfect? I'll start by just saying thank you so much for the warm welcome. I really appreciate it and, uh, Kathy, I appreciate as well you helping to set the stage for me in terms of just the, the range of things that we do, and I am going to talk about that a little bit. um, so, thank you for the warm welcome. I am absolutely delighted to be here and you know it's Al always a pleasure uh to welcome leaders from across our region uh to our Federal Reserve Bank of Boston uh site, and so Civic leaders, Business Leaders, Community leaders, um it all of you are so important to really making an economy vibrant, and that is Central to the mission here at the Federal Reserve, and I'll say a bit more about that. so, um, you know, just really uh have been looking forward to this and I also look forward to being able to connect as part of the Q&A and uh as part of the. I think there's a bit of informal networking uh opportunities after. I also really want to take a moment to thank Kathy um for a couple things. one is certainly for suggesting um that I I join this Gathering, which, again, I've been looking forward to. um, and clearly Kathy is a predecessor here and her Legacy at the Boston fed is, you know, really, um is so Broad and impactful in a variety of different ways, which, of course, I have been a great beneficiary of um. she was also one of the very first to reach out with a warm welcome when I was announced as the president and um and when I started in this role, and that has been really appreciated too. um, so you know, I also just wanted to make sure that you know that every time you visit our building or are in the area uh, you pass in front of our building, you are on the Kathy nahan Plaza and so yeahexactly, and so, uh, I enjoy thinking of that as I am uh Crossing through that special space. also, um, and and and that really is a a tribute to her, I'll say, tireless emphasis on the importance of our bank really reaching outside its walls and connecting with uh key organizations and people across the district. so, um, thank you for that and, again, that Legacy continues. so, um, now what I'm going to do is I'm going to provide some opening remarks about the Federal Reserve, about the economy and monetary policy and my Outlook, and then open things up and uh. so we're going to have a conversation and then open things up for a general uh Q&A. so let me start with just a little bit about the, the fed's portfolio, because, um, as uh has already been mentioned, I think most people don't really much about the fed and what it does and and why it does the many things it does. so, as a nation Central Bank established by Congress more than 100 years ago, the federal reserve's responsibilities are really Broad, and Kathy's already mentioned that they- but they revolve around a kind of core public Mission, and I like to say that that is a vibrant economy that works for everyone, not just for some people. and, of course, a strong economy has many, many dimensions, and so, from my perspective, that's why the FED is involved in such a wide range of activities, and all of them are in the public interest. again, most people know us for monetary policy and the research that really underg gurs that, and I'll come back and have quite a bit more to say about that part of our work again. we also supervise uh some of the nation's financial institutions, provide back-end infrastructure and services for payments and financial systems. we examine factors that uh can limit people from participating in the economy and we support research and collaborations that expand opportunities for progress in communities across our district. they're 12 Reserve Bank districts. the Boston fed has the first district, which is most of New England, and so I and my team engage widely uh with a variety of different participants in our region across the Six States of New England, both to learn about economic experiences, opportunities, challenges and also to help explain what the FED does and why. I want to mention just two, uh briefly just two, of the many examples of the activities and the initiatives that are part of the Boston feds work in support of that public Mission. so, first of all, many parts of New England that once were centers for manufacturing or natural resources have faced long-term challenges, and that's certainly true here and, of course, it's true across our country. our working places initiative, which is started under my predecessor, Eric Rosen Gren, is based on Research that shows that an essential element of place-based economic Resurgence. so examples of kind of struggling places, small cities or rural areas that are able to uh enjoy a Resurgence economically, that an essential element of that is local cross- sector collaboration that brings together private, nonprofit, philanthropic and government sectors. and now in 30 communities across uh five uh States, uh in New England, teams of local leaders have chosen a shared goal for improving their economy that benefits lowincome people and, just as a few examples, creatively supporting Workforce Development, affordable housing or child care supply or removing barriers to entrepreneurship. and those leadership teams develop and then Implement strategies. the Boston fed's role is to host, convene and support those efforts, but not financially. um, that's part of the the partner broader partnership and the real work is in the local Ingenuity and commitment and ways to help strengthen parts of our district where the economy is struggling. second, I just want to briefly mention some of the fed's work on payments and you know it wasn't so long ago that uh paper checks were actually flown around the country uh to settle at the bank that they were drawn on- obviously a really slow, cumbersome process but important at the time. and the Boston fed played a key role, working with others to help Pioneer digital check, Imaging and sign ific, anly expanded automated clearing of electronic payments. well, more recently, we led the creation here at Boston of an entirely new interbank system for realtime instant payments, which is called the FED now service, to ensure that the nation's payment system is able to meet not only current but also evolving needs efficiently and flexibly. and the FED now service will allow financial institutions of every size across the country to provide safe and efficient instant pay pment Services. when fully available, it'll provide substantial benefits for consumers and businesses, including Rapid access to funds um helping to uh manage cash flows and bank accounts, and a variety of other uh kinds of opportunities as well, which I'm U happy to talk more about. so we're actively engaged with banks of all sizes- small, medium and large- across the country, encouraging and supporting their participation. so while I'd be delighted to talk more about the wide range of things we do as part of that portfolio, I'm going to focus the rest of my remarks on the economy, on my Outlook and on monetary policy, and then I look forward to taking some questions. first, my standard disclaimer: uh, the comments that I'll make are my own View and uh do not necessarily represent the views of my colleagues Across The Reserve System or at the Board of Governors in Washington. so the FED has a dual mandate from Congress, which is price stability and maximum employment, and those are two key facets of a strong, stable, economic uh economy. they're fundamentals that benefit everyone and provide the context for a vibrant, inclusive economy, and, as a Federal Reserve policy maker, I'm committed to Bringing inflation sustainably back to our 2% Target, which is how we've defined price stability, and I remain optimistic- I like to say realistically optimistic- that this can be accomplished in a reasonable amount of time and with a healthy labor market. coming out of the pandemic deep recession, we saw an unusual, very rapid recovery in output and labor markets, but we also experienced a surge in inflation that was sparked by Massive Global Supply Chain disruptions, compounded by strong demand and a shift in consumption patterns away from Services towards Goods. a key implication was demand outstripping Supply and putting upward pressure on prices and also on wages. we saw the very harsh impact of inflation, of high inflation, which is like a tax that affects all of us, and the toll is especially and is especially high for lower income households struggling to make ends made. High inflation also affects firms, complicating their investment and planning decisions. all in all, that's not an environment that Fosters a healthy economy or maximum employment. that's sustainable and that's the why that my commitment to restore price stability is so Resolute, and I always think it's worth taking a moment to explain that. the FED focused on bringing inflation back down to 2% by raising our policy rate to slow demand, helping to realign Demand with Supply in both product and labor markets. the federal Market, the Federal Open Market Committee, or fomc, which is the fed's policymaking body, began raising F the federal funds rate in March of 2022, so just shortly before I came on board as president, and the interest rate hikes were unusual: rapid 525 basis points over just 16 months, with 80% of that total increase coming in the first nine months, moving the fed's monetary policy stance from highly accommodative, encouraging economic activity, to restrictive, by recent historical standards. we've kept the funds rate at its current level of 5 and a qu to 5 a half% since July of 2023, and we're now carefully assessing when it will be appropriate to change the policy stance to begin reducing the target range. despite the tighter policy, economic activity has been remarkably resilient. real GDP growth rebounded quickly and has recently been close to its pre-pandemic rate, and that, of course, was a period when real interest rates were much lower. in particular, the 3.1% GDP growth in 2023 was considerably stronger than most forecasters expected a year earlier at the end of 2022. household consumption, which accounts for about 2third of GDP, has been a crucial driver of that economic growth and has continued to expand robustly, and business investment growth, which is another key component of private domestic demand, has also held up well, despite the higher cost of credit in the labor market. strong economic activity has translated into an unemployment rate that's remained near historic lows, while wages have continued to grow solidly. and so far, the robust labor market has allowed for remarkably inclusive outcomes by historical standards, with employment gains that have been spread across racial and ethnic groups, and this represents important progress towards a more broad-based notion of Full Employment, but can't, of course, be taken for granted. the decline in inflation in the second half of 2023 in this context of strong growth was remarkable. indeed, core pce- and the pce inflation is one of- is the key measure that uh the that looks at particularly closely, but, of course, there are many different measures and the core measure um excludes uh food and energy. of course, we look at all of it, um, but in terms of forecasting the, the core pce measure uh has some very favorable uh uh aspects. so, uh, core pce inflation fell to around 2% um over the last half of 2023, although recent reading have been much more elevated, as I'll discuss in a moment- and the 12-month measure, which is what we use for our Target, remained elevated as well. but substantial disinflation associated with sustained real activity. again, that's very unusual and that points to improvements in Supply having played a very important role. that can largely be traced to three factors: the resolution of supply chain bottlenecks, which, of course, was anticipated uh and it very helpful, particularly related to Goods prices. a surprise in Rebound in um. labor force participation for Prime AG individuals, driven significantly by immigration and actually also by Prime AG women, which is a a bit surprising given continued challenges related to child care um. and also, notably, labor productivity gains in some sectors such as retail. so an important part of the story of the disinflation that we saw amid strong real activity in 2023 really came from those improvements, one of which was anticipated, but the other two of which I would characterize as more surprising. so these Supply improvements have been really good news. narrowing the gap between demand and supply has put downward pressure on inflation and so far, restrictive monetary policy has had a limited overall impact on economic activity. this is likely due to factors specific to this recovery, which have strengthened households and business balance sheets and made demand from consumption and business activity less interest sensitive. in particular, consumers have been able to finance expenditures by drawing down a buffer of savings that were built up early in the pandemic, and many businesses were able to refinance and extend their debt maturities when interest rates were very low and again providing a buffer for them. so, given the evolution of economic conditions so far, what can we expect going forward and what are the implications for conducting monetary policy in such an environment? a key but open question is how much longer the supply side progress might continue to reduce inflationary pressures amid very strong economic activity. so, while I'd certainly very much welcome further increases in labor Supply and productivity gains, I see the prospects for continued Supply improvements as limited. achieving a sustained return to the 2% inflation Target, therefore, will require slower pace of demand growth going forward. I do believe that the current policy stance should deliver that more sustainable rate of demand growth while preserving a healthy labor market, but it's difficult to say how quickly this will materialize and there are certainly risks to that Baseline Outlook. I do see some signs consistent with an expected demand moderation, for example, the rising delinquencies on credit cards and auto loans, excluding airc aircraft capital goods orders are slowing, suggesting that firms are becoming more interest sensitive. and, despite hiring strength, there are indications that the labor market is normalizing at healthy levels. for instance, quit rates are back to the levels seen pre pandemic. but the potential impact and timing of these indications of slowing are very uncertain. in a sign of still robust demand, payroll growth, which is uh employment growth. over the last quarter averaged 276,000 jobs per month and that's a pace that's like likely faster than what's needed to keep up with population growth, even taking into account the increased immigration that I mentioned earlier. and core inflation has moved up relative to the very to the low readings that I described in the second half of last year. the implications of these recent data for the evolution of inflation remain to be seen. for instance, we should not necessarily have been surprised by some higher inflation readings early this year after the low readings in the second half of 2023. over over all that, recent data have not materially changed my Baseline Outlook, but they do highlight uncertainties related to timing and also the need for patience, recognizing that disinflation may take longer and continue to be uneven, not a smooth, uh nice, uh, predictable path, uh, back down um. this also implies that easing of policy this year, uh, maybe less easing of policy this year than previous thought. so more time is needed to have greater confidence about the Outlook, and I emphasize greater here, because I do expect that the economy will eventually slow as we see the full effects of past monetary policy actions take hold, and I also expect that the path will continue to be bumpy and we should not overreact to individual data readings. and I'll note that the monthly inflation uh readings um continue to be very volatile. we often say the data are noisy, um, and they're more, more volatile, the monthly readings, than they had been pre pandemic. furthermore, I see the risks around the Outlook as two-sided. it's essential that we not ease prematurely to ensure that price stability really is restored um, easing prematurely would actually make our task harder. at the same time, waiting too long would run the risk of an excessive slowdown. so what would I need to see in the data to determine when it will be appropriate to ease? expecting all of the data to speak fully uniformly is too high a bar in my view. still, it'll be important to see sustained and broadening signs of progress towards the fed's Dual mandate goals, while recognizing, as I've said, that that progress is likely to continue to be uneven. so, to conclude, I remain what I continue to call a realistic optimist. so, while I'm realistic about the risks, I think the economy is likely on a path to 2% inflation on a sustain basis while maintaining a healthy labor market, and recent developments highlight to me the importance of a patient methodical approach as we assess holistically. so, looking at the wide range of different types of information um the the available data, incoming data have eased my concern about an imminent need to reassess the stance of monetary policy. it just may take more time than previously thought for activity to moderate and to see further progress in inflation returning durably to our Target. less concern about labor market fragilities, combined with the possibility that policy may be only moderately restrictive, also reduces the urgency to ease. ultimately, though, policy is not on a preset path where we can simply announce exactly how it will unfold, but it remains well positioned to manage upside and downside risks. this is a good place to be overall, as we carefully assess the evolving data and the Outlook. so, thank you, I look forward to the conversation and also to yourquestions. Susan, that was fabulous. this is working right. yes, okay, great, that was fabulous. thank you so much. I'm I'm so glad. at the end you said patient, methodical and holistic. that was in one of your last speeches and I I was very drawn to that as a description of what has to be done, how you have to move right now and be very conscious of a whole and be very patient. um, you talked a bit about data. if you think back over the time that you've been- uh, you've been here, um, at the fed and probably before that- when you look at data now as we come out of the pandemic- and is it fetus tightened and so forth- what are the big surprises? where are the data surprises as far as you're concerned? is it the fact that the economy is more bullant at a given level of interest rates than you would have expected, or is it something else? so, uh, so, first of all, um, yeah, I, I am, I will. you probably will hear me talk about holistic. um, I think one of the key things about the data is the importance of looking at what I think is almost a constellation of different pieces of data to try to get that broader picture. and so one of the things that's been emphasized in my mind is that any one indicator may only be telling a piece of the story, and with the data being noisy. so I think that that, uh, the first thing I would say in response to that is: it really speaks to me to the need to look holistically, and I I actually mean statistical data and also some the qualitative data, um. but my second point would be: there's a long list of data surprises, uh, as I think back to the past two years, so maybe I just briefly highlight just a couple of them. so you know, I think early on, um, the extent to which the supply shock, Supply constraints, Supply chains were really going to place such a significant role, um, you know, in in hindsight that seems pretty obvious, given the magnitude UD of the pandemic shock, but at the time it wasn't really um, and the amount of time that would take to really play out and begin to resolve was a surprise. and you know, uh, data on supply chain and Supply constraints is now a regular part of what we look at, and 10 years ago I don't think that that was true, um, but there have been so many surprises along the way, which is part of why the importance of really being patient and methodical, um, so you know, one of the other things I might talk about- uh, just really briefly- is the um: a real focus on different types of uncertainty and how the data can help us try to resolve some of the puzzles. so I talked a lot about how, um, we hadn't anticipated the supply improvements in 2023, but if you, you know, if you think about a simple Supply demand chart, you know, how do you get strong economic growth while prices are declining? that a more of a supply shift, right, that's Supply improvements. that's not demand, but you could still have the um, you know so, so that helps to realign the supply and the demand, um, and so that helped a lot. so there were certainly some surprises there coming again. increased productivity, productivity, absolutely, um and uh. you know, and I've learned a lot from talking to uh, to Business Leaders, small and large, across the district, about what they're seeing with productivity. where is it coming from? and- and I don't think it's AI yet, right, I think it is a variety of things, um, you know, firms had to really focus. in a context where it's so hard to hire on, how do you raise labor productivity? how do you really- um, you know, meet your output needs, um, with fewer workers? that's productivity increase. and then also, if you have a period where there's such high turnover and you're replacing people, you have all of these people who have less experience over time, as that slows down and there's much lower turnover- uh, much less quitting right now and much less turnover that you see productivity Rising because you have built back up the experience. so there's multiple channels for, uh, that productivity growth. and I think there certainly were surprises, um, surprises there in housing. you know we're looking at what's the trajectory on the housing side. so I think that's a long list in terms of the data surprises. so how about the Holy Grail, this, the um, the possibility that we could have a soft Landing, as we used to call it? um, it seems as though we're closer to that. when I think of the cycles that I went through and Eric went through, it seems like we're a lot closer to that ready Holy Grail, as I say, of the soft Landing where you have growth slowing, inflation going down, no need for the economy to go into a recession to cure inflation. things go along, growth continues and prices are stable or as stable as they could possibly be. I know that's asking too much of the fed and too much of of our economy, but it's closer now than it was at any time when I was on a committee. so, yeah, some some people talk about it, um. so you know, I think we each have different ways of talking about that. um, that very much aligns with my realistic, optim optimism. so the optimism is very much seeing a baseline path and when I first started, I actually started talking about that, um, in Fall of 2022- that I saw a pathway that, uh, included bringing inflation down without needing the kind of significant downturn and rise in unemployment that had, you know, been more what you would expect. based on historical experiences- and there were a couple- there were a couple of reasons for that. in particular, the Dynamics of what had caused the inflation were really different. there was a lot more on the supply side and so many firms had such trouble hiring that you know they were telling us that even if demand slowed, they're going to hang on to their workers. so it looked like it was just a very different trajectory, um, I thought, I think the path has widened to get there, but I'm still realistic. the uncertainties, the risks that, um, you know that we don't know exactly what we've been surprised to a number of times. I think a little humility is is helpful. so, um, very humble, um surprise, as always. so I think there is a uh, I think there is a solid pathway that uh brings inflation down while labor markets stay healthy and the economy um remains on a solid pathway, and that's wonderful. um, we are in a place where I, uh, you know, uh, I balance the risks right. I'm looking at both sides of our dual mandate: the uh price stability side, certainly- and we've talked quite a lot about that- and the maximum employment side as well, um, so you know. so, yes, I do see a pathway. I think the risks keep evolving. there's still very much there, and so the realistic part of the optimism. I don't want to separate the two. Susan Collins, the academic Economist, we hear your voice. I'd like to turn to the personal. Susan Collins, sitting around the open market table has got to be something, an experience that um was hard to prepare yourself for. I mean, you can read the minutes all you want, but actually being. there is something else. I'd love to hear your comments on that. yeah, absolutely, you know, I suspect you have memories of the first time you sit around that fomc table. right, yeah, it's, um, that's, that's heady, it's, it's such important work, um, and uh, you know, I, I think I will always remember the first time I sat around the table, even though, um, for a variety of reasons or many of the uh, the um presidents and the governors that I already knew, which made it a bit easier. if it's a group of people- and you know this was early on- the room was um, this was one of the first times that the fomc was back in person. of course, everything had been virtual for a while and coming back in person, but it did not have all of the research directors and a number of other staff in the room, so it was a. my first time was a relatively small group. still. obviously, this is serious business: the um economy, still lots of real challenges, very important work, obviously intimidating, um, you know, but an honor and a privilege and I learned something every time I sit around that table. um, I suspect that is, you know. I suspect you have similar memories as well. um, but, uh, it's really an honor, a privilege and, uh, fascinating point where there's been disagreements. we used to have some pretty hot and heavy disagreements. from time to time it gets masked over in the minutes by this very careful language, but you know whose face you shouldn't look at, or who eyes whose eyes you shouldn't catch, or else so, um. so there certainly are disagreements. I would say, um, you know, there's a range of views around the table, um, and that's part of why I think there's a lot to learn. so it's not as if we all go in there and we have exactly the same thoughts. um, you know, we, we do a lot of background preparation. I would say that the, you know, early on it was pretty clear rates were close to zero. it was very clear that rates had to get increased. this was not an environment where, if you're trying to realign demand and Supply, you wanted interest rates at zero. so there's very little disagreement there. accept how much right. I mean, we did 375 basis point increases, which is extremely unusual. so the the discussion, there was more how, how fast, um, and then there was discussion about, as we slowed to a more, uh, you know, traditional Pace, how high to go, and there certainly was a range of views about how far we were going to have to go or not. there's now, um, the sep, the summary of economic projections that every other meeting you get information of about the range of views, of the outlooks of the governors and the presidents, and so there's quite a bit more information than there was about the range of views, um, and so, uh, you know you can see when the, the range expands to some degree, so there may be a bit more information, uh, in terms of things. but, um, you know, I would say it's very respectful, it's very substantive and as it should be, and and there often are follow-up discussions. you know you made these comments around the table. uh, explain more how you got there, cuz I see it really differently, and and so, uh, so that there is an ongoing conversation, um, among some of us, as we really try to understand what's happening in the economy and it's complicated, yeah, no, that is healthy and, don't get me wrong, it was always very, um, uh, respectful of everybody's opinion, but you, you knew who to rely on to bring in the uh other side of the question if you were on a particular side, and that's important, right? I mean, if we all agreed. that would not be healthy, it would not be good. policy setting really wouldn't be. do need to listen to everybody. the 12 Reserve Districts were set up um really very differently than any other Central Bank, and set up to be sure that um input came from every part of the country um. there's more of them in the East because that's where the population centers were uh when the Federal Reserve um uh was brought into being um, but still every part of the country uh gets reflected um. I've noticed in you know, some of your travels around the second district, some of your first district, I should say uh, some of your um speeches and and the kinds of Outreach you've made, that you've really been making an effort to get around and see the variety of different economic situations of which you know. Boston is at the high end and there are places in Maine and even Eastern Massa in in Western Massachusetts that um make Boston uh are totally different from the way Boston is and I know you've been reaching out to those people. maybe you want to talk about it. it's not just an open market uh policy that you'd be involved, but the bank itself is involved in providing services and reaching out to different parts, different communities within its district, and I, I know you've been engaged with that. um, yeah, absolutely, thank you. let let me say a little bit about that, but maybe the place to start is: it's absolutely right that the, the, the FED, is a very unusual Central Bank in terms of its structure, um, and from my perspective, that's a strength. um, you know, and I also say I spent, uh, like, before coming here, I was at the University of Michigan, which is a big Federated University. so, um, I, uh, I have spent a lot of time thinking about how Federated systems work, and they're all different, um, so one of the things they're really good at is local engagement, and I do want to say a bit about that, because I think, um, I think it's really important that the Federal Reserve be connected to the economy on the ground, and if you're sitting in Washington, you really can't do that, and our country's very big, and even within the first district, to your point, um, there's not one economy, right? I mean, there are a lot of different dimensions to it. so Federated systems are great with Innovation, they're great with local engagement, um, so there are a lot of things that they're. they're great with resiliency. all of those are things that I think are important for the Federal Reserve, and they also create challenges, right, because you know, how are you more efficient? um, how do you balance efficiency and resiliency and some of the and Innovation, and those are things that I I think we are uh very thoughtful about and we're we're taking time to see what's the right balance. how should we evolve in order to to balance those things? um, so I do take very seriously the engagement across the Six States in New England, um, you know it's it's extremely informative, it's interesting, um, and I think it's just important, uh, for the reasons that I said. so, just to give a couple of examples, I do value the information that I learn for, uh, the monetary policy part, and, um, sometimes people are surprised by that, but the just a couple of of uh things to to say, a lot of the statistical data that we get tends to be for last month or last quarter or last year, and talking to Business Leaders, government leaders, C Civic leaders, they're talking about what's happening right now and they're talking about where they're thinking of going, and you can have a much more nuanced conversation. so to me, it really complements a lot of the statistical analysis, modeling and other work that we do with the, with the numbers, and I'm the total data geek. so you know, yes, I I do look at all of that, but that qualitative information matters. um, and then to your point, um, that broader portfolio of work that we do to support the mission of a vibrant economy that works for everyone, um, how do you really understand what the barriers are to participating in an economy? and, and to the extent that there are barriers that reduce opportunities for participation, that actually reduces the ability of our econom to be as productive as it could be. it actually constrains growth, right, that is actually constraining our ability to be as vibrant. and so I see it as actually core to the broader Mission. and you know, as, uh, as examples, the three things that I hear about the most in Boston and everywhere else I go- housing, Child Care, Transportation- and those interact with each other in different ways. so, spending time in Maine talking to large employers about how hard it is to hire, in part because the housing and costs and availability are so challenging that you hire people but then they don't accept the job, and that's just something that I've heard, uh, from many others as well, talking in um, New Hampshire, going to visit a daycare center and understanding a little bit more what pressures they're feeling as they try to balance um concerns for their employees and concerns for their Community while they try to run a business. and so how do you think about that? that, and actually there's quite a bit of work underway um with uh, some of the experts here at the Boston fed and others to try to understand Child Care challenges, what impact they have on the community and approaches that me might do make collaboratively working. this is not a problem that the FED is going to serve solve at all, but we should certainly care about it. it's an economic issue. so those are just two examples of some of the kinds of things that are really informed by those discussions, engagements, uh, across the district, and I I mentioned the working places initiative. so there's a lot more I could say on that, uh, but I do see it as a critical part of the work that we do. I mean it is fascinating and, as I saw too. I mean there isn't a piece of data that the staff at the board don't have and don't have: 14 different variations of that piece of data and nine different ways to look at it and 40 different charts to show it. they don't have what you have. when you go out and talk to people in Maine, in New Hampshire, in Rhode Island, in wherever, in the first district and across the country, they don't have that and every now and then they respect that, not always, but I I actually think that we are um working collaboratively. so our regional community outreach Department actually does a lot of that and they so, um, I've been delighted to see the many ways that we are collaborative within our bank, looking at things in different ways, um and uh, you know, Finding uh ways to do that. uh, those discussions across different risk management is another area in which the reserve banks really enhance the understanding of what the risks are That You Don't See from data, you don't see from a central organization. you mentioned in your uh comments this to another subject and then we got to go to to questions and answers um all of the various things that the Federal Reserve Banks do. we talking in that direction. but looking at the technology that the reserve banks employ, particularly in the payment system, and the leadership role that the Boston fed has long had on the technology side, um creating better systems, whether they're fed wire systems, securities transfer systems or now, fed. now, um, this is something you don't read about in the newspaper, you don't hear about, but that underlying fundamental structure of how payments get made and make Qui made quick, more quickly and with less overhead associated with them, it's a very big component of our economy. I'm I'm so proud you guys continue to do that. I will say we're proud of that work as well, and early days. so happy to say just a bit more about that. um, you know, uh I it was back in the 70s that some of the work to automate the check clearing happened. I think at that time something like 70% of payments were made by check. that's hard to believe. I mean, I'm not sure my kids were in their, you know, late 20s write checks, yeah, and about 70% of the people who worked in reserve banks worked on checks, worked on checks, right, so things have evolved in dramatic ways. um, you know a lot of what the fed does with its payments infrastructures, kind of like the plumbing. so if it works well, um, you take it for granted and that's a good thing. um, but it really matters because you can't have a vibrant economy without a safe, secure, resilient, effective payment system and you've got to be Innovative because how people want to make payments evolves. people want- you know they're using venmo. they, people want to make instant payments. so this is the first new payments infrastructure 50 years, um the technological dimensions of it from from the Federal Reserve, yes, uh, I, I thank you. yes, um, uh, and the technological dimensions of it are really Innovative, um, and the structure uh once uh you know as. so we're now in the phase of um uh Banks um adopting, becoming part of that Network, and we are working actively with banks- small Banks, medium Banks, large Banks. when we launched in July of 20, uh 23, there were um kind of the initial cohort was, I think, 35 Banks and we're now up to over 650 Banks. so you know that work continues, but they're, you know, 6,000 uh across the country. so there's there's more to do there, and some of the kinds of things that it will enable is, um you know, in terms of Just in Time payments. so there are uh many households which, um you know, are paying payments to make just in time, and so the ability not to pay late fees because you can um receive payments immediately and make payments immediately, um that will be significant for many, many different parts. there are businesses who would like the opportunity to be able to pay for um contract work immediately. if you think about the ability to be able to send resources in um you know uh, crisis areas, whether it's a hurricane or tornado or you know whatever the, so that's major. you know, if you want to send me uh resour, you want to send money between your own bank accounts, that can be complicated um, and so there's a range of use cases which are expanding out and um. the ability to um make payments and have settlement in real time, 247 through the the you know our banking Network, I think will be pretty uh fundamental change as we move from here to the system where that is more ubiquitous. so, yes, it's something we're proud of and there's work to do um you know uh, in addition to the work on adoption, there's also, of course, work to really strengthen the, the product itself, things like addressing concerns about fraud, which is real um. so there's a range of of uh activities underway and it's a very different kind of work than the engagement that I talked about before um with the low and moderate income communities and others. the very technological dimensions of ourr know, for big businesses and even medium-sized ones, um, you know, Banks turn themselves inside out to make payments immediately, whether they use fedwire or some other automated payment system or automated securi transfer system. this system has the potential to really help people who don't have a Bank behind him, who aren't used to being treated that well, and I I think it really goes along with so much of what you've been talking about in terms your, your concerns for the people here in the heris Federal Reserve System and and across the country. yeah, um, you know, people who are, who have, uh, have, their resources in a little Credit Union, right, that right, and so the idea of that ubiquity, um, once, the um once, it is, uh, fully, fully out there. um, so, again, we're proud of it, we're excited and there's more work to do. so I know we could go on, you and I uh, for some time, but I think other people would like to ask some questions, so let me open it up to question and andanswers. holdplease, I'll take the chair's prerogative to ask the first question here. I my um attention went straight up when you mentioned, um, the surprises in various different pieces of the data that you have seen in the last year or so coming out of the pandemic, and especially your downward motion when you talked about housing, um prices and or maybe the housing market and, in particular, because that is, as you've said, such an important economic thriver, not just real estate, the housing, but as an employment issue for the Massachusetts and Regional economy, but in particular here in Boston. um, I'm very interested in what caused you to motion downward in reference to that, because that would be a very, very positive development um, and one that I know that the governor and the um economic development team work on an awful lot in the Commonwealth. so housing is essential in a range of different dimensions, and I'm happy to say a bit more about that, and I'm trying to remember, uh, what downward motion I made, as I I don't actually recall that I did that. so, um, yeah, I'm, I'm trying to revisit that moment and I'm not sure that I can make that connection, um, you know, certainly it is uh, so. so there many things one could say about housing. let me just say uh, three um, one of them is that, um, shelter prices or housing prices are, of course, a key part of um what we track when we look at inflation, and it is true uh that um, uh you know U during the pandemic that housing prices, both uh sale prices and also rents, increased pretty substantially and the house price inflation increase was part of the surgeon inflation that we saw earlier in the pandemic. and it's also true that one of the things we saw in 2023 was a notable decline in the inflation coming from shelter prices, and that was coming from rents coming down. um in aggregate, it came from some declines in house prices as well, although I would say that's less true in New England because there's a lot of variety across um the different parts of the country, country and the more recent data that we've seen um the first quarter of 2024, um it's been more flat. we haven't seen the continued decline. so I suspect what I was talking about was in 2023. that part of that disinflation was actually the shelter price inflation coming down, notably, but it's still elevated and there's more to go. I mean not prices didn't come down, it's the rate of growth, the rate the, the inflation right, the price increase. you know, and I will say there are lots of dimensions to what's happening with housing. some of them relate to the short-term cyclical dimensions of a recession, uh, the Deep recession from related to the pandemic, and then the recovery and the um higher interest rat, so that Dynamic is more of the shorter term cyclical, and then there's a long-term trends that influence housing construction, that influences, that influence the whole pipeline of housing Supply and um the the challenges that we are seeing across our country, and certainly in New England um, have a lot to do with that longer term history, not just with the, the uh context that we've seen. you know, the um supply chain challenges increased, uh, construction costs dramatically, so there were cost increases, there was labor cost increases there, you know. then the increases in interest rates have affected mortgages, have created a significant amount of what is is often called house lock, where there are a lot of families who, um, you know, uh, earlier, with very low interest rates, might have downsized or moved to upsize, but they don't want to give up their very low interest rates, and so there's very little inventory. and, again, that's particularly true in the New England economy and it's true in rural areas, it's true in small cities and it's true in Boston. so, uh, you know, that is one that's pretty much true across our region. um, so there are a lot of aspects of housing which is are very important in terms of a vibrant economy and are really, uh, challenging in some ways, um, and some of them have to do with those longer term Trends. some of them have to do with the shorter term Dynamics, um, so all of that is true. you know, people realize just how lovely it is to live in New England, and so there are a lot of people who came from the rest of the country to buy property in New England. many of them are either working remotely- they're not necessarily taking jobs in the areas that they're living- which means that they're fewer homes for people who want to work in those areas. so there's lots of things that all are happening at once that help to explain the unusual Dynamics and the very high home prices, especially in NewEnglandthat's no, no, no from. oh, oh, sorry, sorry, please go ahead. we have to pass the questions to other tables Now, ladies. uh, thank you so much, Susan. uh, it's always great to listen to you, and I was really glad that you just made a comment about longer term Trends, because I wasn't sure how you weigh the short-term, longterm um in the work that you do at the FED. I wanted you to talk a little bit about how you look at Labor and the perhaps longer term stresses or pressures on pricing that we might be feeling. I think about an economy where we have a declining birth rate and where we have people aging out, dropping out, moving out and a cap on immigration. how, how does the fed or how do you think about the kinds of pressures that we might feel here from a labor cost perspective? I don't know if Ai and Robotics and remote work is going to substitute fast enough, but wondered what the FED in general, or you in particular, thought about that. yeah, thank you. um and again a a multi-dimensional question, and so let me tackle a few aspects of it. I don't know that I'm going to tackle all of them. um, so, starting with the longer term Dimensions, there, New England is aging faster than other regions of the country and that certainly has broader implications in terms of um trends for labor Supply, and um is part of why, um, uh, unemployment rates are somewhat lower on average in New England. it's also part of why so many firms um have told me over time- and it's gotten easier but just how hard it is to hire in a variety of different contexts. so that has led at least some to be exploring whether there are um technological Alternatives and ways to adapt um and ways to attract people. are there ways to keep some of the young people who come here to go to college- of course, this is a hub for higher education- um and encourage them to stay um. so so the variety of different conversations that relate to some of those longer term Trends, um, and, and I think there's a lot to consider there, to look at there, um, and you know, and so that's only a piece of an answer, but you're absolutely right, I think these long-term trends are important. I would add that, um, the pandemic, in terms of how people think about work, I don't think that has fully settled. so you know, both in terms of, uh, the location of where you work and where you live, um, you know we had a seat change for a while. there's been some shift back as there's been more move to hybrid, but I, I don't think that that's fully settled out. and I also think, in terms of the uh, how people think about, uh, what work, what jobs mean in terms of their broader livelihoods, I, I think there's a lot of things that are evolving. is that going to perhaps exacerbate some of the trends that we already had, or is it going to counter some of them? I, I think it's a bit early to make a lot of those pronouncements, um, and then, on top of that, there are a lot of short-term Dimensions related to labor market. so one of the things that we are certainly looking carefully at is the extent to which what's happening with the growth in wages relates to what's happening to inflation, and that's more of a short-term cyclical Dynamic. but if you go historically, it's tended to be true that one of the drivers of higher or Rising inflation is prices. you know, fueling that. um, analysis by experts here in Boston find much less evidence for that. uh, so far in this cycle, and in particular, if you so, it is true that wage growth at the moment is higher, is faster than the pre-pandemic average, and so that looks like that would be not sustainable and not consistent with inflation continuing to come down at the same time, given the productivity increases that we've seen- that I mentioned before, because you've got to adjust for that, and given the past price increases, because prices surged before wage growth started increasing. so there's some room for catchup because, uh, you know, many workers uh, still haven't caught up to the Past price. so so it's a bit more complicated to assess. an R analysis suggests that the faster than pre-pandemic wage growth we've seen recently is still consistent with continued um price disinflation, which I think is good news, because over time that catchup for workers of you know from the increase in prices which has been challenging with living standards and making ends meet, so that's helpful. in a lot of the wage increases have been at the lower wage part of the distribution. so so I said a little bit about the long-term, a little bit about maybe the medium-term, a little bit more about the short term, and they all interact. but I think the the what your focus is on productivity is so critical. I mean, I remember Bob solo saying, I think about one or another of the of the recoveries, that everything is there except productivity that we need to make the economy grow better. um, and it's wonderful when I look at numbers that take the edge out of wage increases. let people live better because they're able to produce more, because we have fewer of them working and each one of them is getting paid better to do a better job and create the kind of technological and business change that we need to keep prices low but the economy growing, and one possibility that I'll just add is that during the period when, um, you know, the economy shut down, many people were not able to work. um, there was an opportunity, it seems- and again this is, you know, still work underway- for when people came back to work, for them to do so in a way where they had better matches, so some of the productivity gains across the economy could actually come from that, and that actually might also helped to explain why there's it's been somewhat more Equitable, um, in terms of how the gains were distributed. um, because of the dynamic of how people came back, when there was so much demand for workers and the rep wasn't there, and so, as people came back, they often had more choice in terms of where they went and how to think about that. so a lot of unusual aspects. part of the women situation too. yeah, I don't want to be accused of skipping the lines. thank you for all these insights. um, I was going to ask you the. the FED played an enormously important role in documenting income inequality in Boston before the pandemic and then, God knows, the big commitment has been to come out and make this recovery a facilitate more equity, and I'm wondering- I know the fed's working with a chamber and others in updating the study, but I'm wondering anecdotally: what are you looking at and and how? what's your comfort level that this recovery in what, however slow it might be, might result in more Equity at the uh at the end? um, so I'm happy to say a bit more about that. thank you for raising so. some years ago there was a study which it's often called the color of wealth study, which I think is what you're referring to. that um that looked at disparities across uh race in particular but and a couple of dimensions in wealth and found really Stark uh differences um. so there is work underway that um to both update and expand and to do that work with a much bigger sample so that it's possible to have a, you know, kind of a different level of rigor. um. you know it's great to see how much interest and attention there was in that earlier study. it didn't have, you know, the sample size and some of the the other uh rigorous Dimensions. that um. you know that we would want to be able to really draw inference and also, um was not really set up as a way to uh be able to talk about um, some of the possible Pathways and what some of the the kinds of things one might do. so that work is underway and the Boston fed is very much working with a number of uh key partners and we are thrilled to have the partners. um, um, it's going to be a couple of years before we have uh results to start talking about, because we want to do it well, we want to do it right. uh, it's called the mass Echo study and I'm actually forgetting exactly what that. AC, too many acronyms, um, but, but that's work that we see is very important and that we are quite committed to. at the same time, I also should mention that there are other things that we are engaged with: to try to better understand and think through how often, collaboratively, we can help address other types of barriers and other uh Dimensions related to, and wealth disparities are a barrier to participation in a variety of different contexts. so that's part of the broader community and economic development work that we do and it's something that uh, as I mentioned before, we take quite seriously. so, again, we'll need a little patience there, too, in terms of as we're methodical with our studying the data. it's a little bit of a theme here, um, um, but I I'm glad that we're really doing it collaboratively and that we're doing it carefully, um, and so I I look forward to being able to talk about the results, but it'll be a couple of years before we get there. Darren, I'd love to call on you, but I'm so focused here on these tables. this is the. yeah, I know, I know I was hoping now the next one to go back a layer, so well, well, thank you for taking our questions and getting our feedback. I guess, and I I really um was interested in your supply questions and I'm really wondering if how you are, are pressure testing the supply side of these models that you got, and I I really think the underlying inflation right now is at 2%. I mean, you got the houy Red Sea problem. you got the low water levels in the canal Suz- I mean, not the Suz, but the Panama Canal. you're, we're still getting over the auto parts and component inflation. we got the a war in Ukraine affecting grain, metal, energy worldwide. uh, we got food shortages due to um, all sorts of droughts and and climate change, um, and and a lot of pressure now on ships and materials and even labor from defense, increased worldwide defense spending and AI chips. so I think the- I'll be honest with you. I believe the FED is aggravating it at 5 a half, 5 and a quarter, 5 and a half percent. I think it should be, you know, maybe it's a percent, maybe it's a percent and a half, but your, your high rates are affecting new car loans. you know in the paper that just this week development projects are being delayed because of high interest rates. um, the you've got uh housing purchases, no housing inventory, so of course that's going to affect price, that new build housing affected by uh, you know, interest rates, those construction loans, and then the higher vehicle costs and the home costs are affecting Insurance, homeowners, insurance going through the roof, which hits, you know, the, these um inflation rates and the auto insurance. so I'm just thinking if, if you started dropping it in June, even a quarter percent, instead of September or December, and I and I I will acknowledge that- you just decided, Ed, to cut in half the rate, that you're bringing down the balance sheet, I think that's a real positive step this week or last couple weeks that you did that. but I think you'll increase the, have a chance to increase housing stock back to normal. uh, you'll bring um people put more money, continue to put more money in capital expenditures for more productivity increases with slightly lower rates. uh, the Labor uh is going to continue to increase with the immigration. you you know, whether it's capped or not, the immigration's high and and we got a lot coming in right now, um, and so I just think, if you wait till September, whether you're who you vote for in November, you're going to think it's, it's going to look political too, it's going to get worse. so I'm just saying, why not start now? because a lot of these are one-time items and I think that I think the higher rates are aggravating some of that underlying inflation. um, but you know, again, I tip my hat to the soft Landing we're getting. so I'm just giving you feedback for somebody who's working with primarily emerging companies and some Middle Market companies that have high debt that you know are less than 500 to a billion in sales. thank you so, uh, so, thank you. let me say a and I I always appreciate feedback so much, uh. so thanks for the for the thoughts on the comment. so just one thing quickly: the discussion in the March meeting about the balance sheet runoff was not a decision, so we haven't made a decision yet. there was broad agreement that um, you know, in the, in an approach. let me just back up and just explain. you know what that means for hot second, and then I'll come back and talk about, uh, the other part of your comment. so, in the background, passively, you know um. so, first of all, as as part of the um helping the economy to recover in the midst of the very deep pandemic recession, the Federal Reserve purchased, uh, lots of assets and that dramatically expanded the balance sheet. and now that we're in a very different place. actually, just before the um interest rate increases started in 2022, the Federal Reserve started passively, in the background, um, allowing as uh as those assets mature, not uh, repurchasing them, allowing them to run off the balance sheet. so that's what the runoff is, and it will gradually reduce the size of the balance sheet. um, and so, uh, the pace at which it's been being reduced is about twice as fast as what had been happening the last time there was this process: 20, well, 2017 to 2019, yeah, so after that up, after 2008 was absolutely so- from that buildup, and so the the uh, the discussion was: does it make sense as um, you know, as we get somewhat lower, there's still a ways to go um well before before we get to a place where it might cause some Market stresses, just to slow things down, to give a bit more time to really assess um, the the. the phrase is often this: passive runoff should be like watching paint try, we're not trying, not trying to create a lot of attention, Etc. and so there was broad agreement for an approach that would slow it and um, but we didn't actually make a decision. but that's the approach that the fomc often takes. as a topic comes, there's a General discussion, a range of views that are shared. um, I think it's helpful that that is communicated through the minutes. we're not trying to make surprises and so, uh, when a decision is made, it would be communicated out before, well, before it would actually be implemented. so you know, is it absolutely true that with higher interest rates, that has a range of implications and impacts on firms of different sizes and businesses and financial institutions? um, and you know, we're, we're certainly aware of that, and some of those consequences are not the intended consequence of the higher interest rates. at the same time, our mandate is price stability, and by Price stability what I mean is um price inflation that's low and stable enough that no one's thinking about it. well, we're pretty far everyone's still thinking about prices and inflation, um, and maximum employment, and so our Congressional mandate is toing bring price inflation back down from the high levels, and our key tool to do that is um raising interest rates that help to supply, to restrain the economy and to do it in a balanced way, which is what we've so far. I think things have going quite well, and you're absolutely right that there are other implications of that that may not be the intended effect. at the same time, our mandate is very clear, and so that's the the kind of the one in the focus, and we've seen the toll that that inflation uh takes. so you know, and I also think it's important for us to be aware of, and to understand and to hear about the challenges that institutions and communities are facing as a result of those High interest rates. so I appreciate the um, you know, the input and the feedback that you shared. thank you, okay. so question from the second row here, gentleman with the red tie, or I have the mic, so I guess the gentleman with almost red hair. thank you, uh. thank you, thank you for all your time and answering our questions. it's it's really, um just a great event. have to speak up. can you hear me now? loud enough? loud enough? yeah, can't hear you, though. um, so the the question that I really wanted to kind of dive into a little bit more is: earlier you mentioned, um about our aging population or maybe aging Workforce. um, I think that's true throughout the world, but here in New England as well, and I think one of the things that doesn't get talked enough is, um the benefits, quite frankly, of higher interest rates. um, for those who do save, um, there's incremental income. and when you combine that incremental income, but especially for a very large population that we have that are either newly retired or entering retirement and they're spending money, uh, they're going on vacations and they're living their life, I Wonder, uh, when you reflect on the economy that we have today, uh, rather than being so Draconian and, oh, this is going to fall apart, um, the economy that we have today, which is healthy, um, what do you see different in the drivers and catalysts of this economy? um, that just may we may not have seen before, and you know, I point out interest rates, of course, because people haven't made, you know, money on their savings for I know 30, some odd years, I mean, there are, there's a generation that doesn't know what it is, um, and and I think that it's an important part of the conversation. thank you so much. yeah, so, uh, I think that's a. that's an interesting question. I will say that I think things are still evolving right. so, um, I might mention a couple of dimensions of things that um are unusual, um, and I think it's premature for some of them to tell how long lasting they may be or not. um, to your point, it's absolutely true that the higher interest rates that are challenging for some are a real benefit for others. and, um, you know, and, and so both, all, all of those things are true. um, so, um, you know, I, I I do think that, uh, we are still seeing some of the implications of having such tight labor markets over time, um- and again, we don't know how that's going to play out- and um being able to connect using technology in a variety of different ways. I think we're still learning what some of the implications of those things are and what some of the opportunities are. um, you know, there, there are, for example, there is some evidence that there have been real benefits in terms of people with disabilities being able to be much more actively engaged in in our Workforce and our economy. um, in part because of the technological opportunities that people weren't really thinking about just a few years ago. and there are a variety of other kind of Dimensions that are there as well. I also think that many of us are thinking a bit more flexibly about how, uh you know, about what work means and I I I think there's some opportunities that could uh have long-term implications from that standpoint as well. but again, I think, uh, you know, hindsight will be a wonderful thing. um, I think it is um premature to know exactly what the longer term implications of some of these Dimensions were, so I don't know. that may address a part of your question. I think there probably some other dimensions that I might have missed. no, I think theology side always thought: well, um, the interest rates are really you realize that you know a lot of TR could say: well, there population that can, but there off can. um, but I think that there's also bb um, can you say bit better, I? I listening to some here up. I'm I'm having really trouble hearing you it. maybe we should, um, pass the mic or oh, I, I was just. I, I was just perhaps saying that you know, there there's a lot of these facets that to be playing a role. um, and I realize I just gave the interest rate example because it is brand new to us and there is a generation that we have that don't know higher interest rates, or that discussion, maybe at the dinner table about the benefits of saving and that sort of thing, and, um, I find it interesting from that perspective, and I was. I think we're going to have time for one more question. okay, yeah, let let me just say one more thing about that. and there something, one of the many things we're watching: savings rates are very low right now, right, so you know, it's not surprising in some ways that, um, when, uh, with some of the supports as we came out of the pandemic, that there were many buffers of savings, that you know, we saw many more savings than had been expected. but over the past couple of years, average savings rates have declined, but to levels notably below where they were pre pandemic and it's hard to whether that will be sus. why is that? will that be sustained? how do we think about that? um, so that's an example of something that is part of why consumption and demand are relatively strong and it's hard to know whether it'll be long lasting or it's just part of this part of our recovery. so, yeah, whether it's just a hangover from having hold so much government money and people say yeah, or or so much challenge, people really want to take that vacation. you know it's hard to know. yeah, um question. I have a very simple question. is this group, several years ago, heard a presentation about the Boston fed working on a project of a central bank digital currency, kind of like a federal Bitcoin? where does that stand? yeah, so, again, thank you for asking the question. let me let me say a little bit about that. so the Boston fed partnered with MIT on a project called The Hamilton project and was named the Hamilton project in part for the Hamilton. you all know there was also a Hamilton who, who had worked at MIT, a woman who had been a software engineer and had made really formative. so you know, there the name came from a couple different places and what that collaborative project did was really because the decision about whether or not to have a, you know, digital Central Bank currency would be a decision that Congress would make- it's not a Federal Reserve decision. if we were instructed by Congress to move in that direction, we wanted to understand what the technological underpinnings would be and and to have really thought through and done some of the background technological work, um to be able to respond in a more timely way. and that's what that project was. it generated quite a bit of very interesting work. there's open source code which is available and um. so that project actually um did end. we appreciated the partnership and I know there's a lot of work ongoing, not necessarily here but more broadly, and we continue to be very interested in the breadth of um. you know opportunities as we think about what I would say is digital payments more broadly, of which a central bank digital currency would be one, but there many others, and the FED now infrastructure that I mentioned is actually connected to some of that work as well. so thanks for the question. thank you so much, Susan. I think Beth is going to say to say that: really a pleasure. thank you until Jo day.