https://www.stlouisfed.org/from-the-president/remarks/2025/omfif-conversation-with-president-musalem

OMFIF Conversation with President Musalem

July 10, 2025

Alberto Musalem

live broadcast with OMFIF (Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum) from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Hello, this is Mark Sil, US Chair AIF. Today I'm delighted to be in the St. Louis Federal Reserve, a lovely building, and I'm being joined by Alberto Musulm, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Lewis since April 2024. Alberto is a participant in the FOMC. He oversees the activities of the ETH Federal Reserve District at its St. Louis headquarters and its branches in Little Rock, Arkansas, Louisville, Kentucky, and Memphis, Tennessee. Prior to joining the Fed, Alberto had a wide ranging career in economics finance. He was CEO and co-chair CEO and co-chief investment officer of events asset management a firm he founded from 2014 to 2017 he served as executive vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and senior adviser to the bank's president from 2000 to 2013 he held many positions managing director partner global head of research at Tudor Investment Company Corporation and uh if you can remember this far back uh we first met when he was a young economist at the International Monetary Fund put into a very sensitive role overseeing Brazil's external developments during its 1998 crisis. So um questions from the audience will have entertain a few at the end. They can be submitted in the chat function. And so Alberto, thank you for allowing me to visit the St. Louis Fed and it's a huge pleasure to be here with you today. So Mark, welcome to the St. Louis Fed. It's great to to to have you here and we're looking forward to our conversation. Great. Well, um hopefully we'll I'll get to ask you a few tough questions, but let me start off with the softball for you. So uh so when I talk to Fed in official uh Fed officials, I usually just lead off by asking them for a thumbnails sketch of the economic outlook and its meaning for monetary policy and then I drill down into the details. So So let's do it this way. Uh what's your overall thumbnail sketch on that situation? So the economy is a good place. The labor market is at or around full employment. It has some downside risks but it it's looking stable and good. Uh inflation is running uh slightly above somewhat above uh our target. There are some upside risks to inflation looking ahead. Monetary policy is modestly restrictive. Um and financial conditions are supportive of of growth. Okay. Very pathy. Um okay. Well, let me ask you a bit then about some of those things that you just said. Um so I I find the inflation outlook baffling. Um first of all there's just so many measures you can look at between sticky trimmed core headline etc etc. But my overall take was inflation had gone down to around 2 and a half% but then things for the outlook became more complicated. So there have been some restrained readings lately. um owing in part to lower energy prices, but you know, energy prices have been jumpy. Um we're still awaiting perhaps the impact of tariffs. Immigration may impact uh inflation. The dot plot median was for 3.1% core PCE increase in 2025, well above the 2% target. So can you uh make it all crystal clear for us? I want for my view. Um uh so our target as you know is in terms of headline uh PC inflation. It's uh it's really important to form a picture of what underlying inflation actually is. I believe the best measure of underlying inflation is core PC inflation. Uh that has been running on an annual basis yearon year at 2.7% which is uh above our target by 0.6. 7%. Uh on a three-month basis though, uh we've had some very positive inflation trends uh in core, in headline, in goods, and in services, and those are very welcome developments. Uh it's important that those developments be sustained and sustainable over time. Uh the outlook for inflation uh that I have and it's in accordance with what many private forecasters have is for inflation to to increase uh going forward. uh mostly owing uh to uh to tariffs uh which uh may settle somewhere uh between the low teens or the the low 20s depending on on trade policy. The average effective rate. The average effective uh tariff. Yes. Okay. Well, um well, let's ask about that. Uh and tariffs. Um as I said, we really haven't seen an an impact of tariffs yet. uh I don't think but there's a bit of a debate and perhaps it gets caricatured a bit but there's uh one camp in the media which is portrayed as seeing the potential impact of tariffs as um transitory oneoff and the argument is made that maybe we should look through it. Um others suggest perhaps there could be second round effects and and the like. um and we should be cautious in adopting a look through strategy. Um hopefully I characterize the debate somewhat correctly. Uh how do you fall on that? So uh uh tariffs could have a temporary effect on p on inflation and a one-off uh impact on prices. Uh they could also have more persistent uh impact on inflation. from my perspective is too soon to tell which way it's going to go. There are good arguments uh on both sides. Uh so let me just offer the arguments and why I believe it's too soon to tell just yet. Uh so the arguments uh for a uh a one-off impact on the price level and a very short-lived impact on inflation are that economics tells us so. Economic textbooks tell us that all else equal. Of course, things are never all else equal, but all else equal in a vacuum in a textbook. Uh you should expect exactly that for tariffs to rise, for uh those increases to be passed on to consumers as one-time price increases and the impact on inflation to be very short-lived. Uh other reasons why it might be short-lived is uh companies who are the deciders here in terms of how much to pass through or not uh you know have built inventories. So they have buffers like inventories, right? And if you look at profit margins, uh they're pretty high in the US economy right now. So there's some room for absorbing u you know the cost increases from from uh tariffs on imports. Um that's another reason why it could be uh the pass through could be limited or or temporary. Um also when I uh get around the country and I talk to to companies, you hear different pass through uh narratives. So when you talk uh upstream uh to the importer, the initial importer, uh they say we're going to pass on 100% of the tariff increases. As you begin to talk further downstream, uh the conversation begins to to change. And when you talk to the final retailer that is going to face the the final sale to the consumer or to the final purchaser, they say it's going to be a little harder uh to uh to pass on. So they're they're different stories and that could limit the impact of of of pass through and and the duration of persistence. So that's that part of the story on the um why could it be more persistent? Uh it could be more persistent because uh tariffs apply uh in this case apply to intermediate goods and intermediate goods are inputs into the production of of final goods. Mhm. Uh and tariffs on intermediate goods could affect the prices and inflation of non-important goods and services. So that could be an indirect effect that we need to be mindful of. And in terms of uh second round effects onto actual inflation, um it's important uh to recognize that we've uh been above our inflation target for four years now. uh businesses and households are very sensitive to uh uh to inflation. Uh nowadays inflation expectations at the front end of the uh short-term inflation expectations have risen although they have declined more recently long-term inflation expectations have remained anchored with the exception of the Michigan survey. uh so uh we have to be mindful of that in understanding second round effects and uh the dollar has depreciated uh and you know that could contribute to inflation uh going forward. So there there good arguments on both sides. I think it's too soon uh to determine uh which of those outcomes is is most likely uh and it's too soon for the following reason. Um uh if you look at what people are actually paying in terms of tariffs, if you look at tariff revenues divided by imports, you know, the the theoretical or the expected effective tariff rate is somewhere between the low teens or the low 20s depending on where trade policy ends. Uh but the tariff revenue relative to imports has not achieved that level yet. It is rising. It it rose from two and a half before April to something like four in April to something like six or six and a half in May. We expected to get close to eight or nine by June. So, it's going to take time for the tariffs to settle what people are actually paying and therefore how they're passing through. Uh when we look at surveys and these are public available surveys by several reserve banks. uh the uh the expected time that companies are working with in terms of pass through is something like 3 months after feeling the initial price increase whether directly or indirectly and so you know there there's a scenario where we could be in Q4 of this year or Q1 or Q2 of next year and uh tariffs are still working themselves through the economy. Okay. Well, thank you. So in essence um it isn't that you uh may not buy into the look through scenario or not but it's a question of the balance of risk for you. Indeed, the um maybe you could elaborate about a bit more um because in your answer you talked about having been above target and um for a while and inflation expectations not being necessarily well anchored. A lot of the surveys I guess show 3% I think as New York Fed. Um given that the pandemic and showed how sensitive Americans are to uh inflation does that weigh on your mind um additionally when you think about the outlook for monetary policy? So, it's critical that we maintain anchored long-term inflation expectations. It's critical. It's a necessary uh condition to attain price stability. Uh anchored inflation expectations are also really important because uh they allow us to conduct and have a dual mandate where we can be responsive to the labor market or to fluctuations in economic activity. Uh if inflation expectations are not anchored, that becomes more difficult uh to do. So, so it's a critical asset that we must preserve. Um, um, uh, when I look at inflation expectations, they are anchored. So, I did not say they're unanchored. Apologies, my mistake. They they are anchored. Uh, you know, the long-term inflation expectations are anchored. Whether you look at uh survey measures, uh, the newer Fed survey measures of three and fiveyear are look pretty anchored to me. Uh, the Michigan survey uh, is an outlier. There's been some methodological changes there which we can discuss u but you know we have to uh look at that not discount it but not uh place uh you know tremendous weight on it. So and if you look at market long-term inflation expectations they seem rather anchored to me very anchored to me. If you look at short-term inflation expectations whether survey or marketbased they both rose after April. uh the survey measures have fallen back. Uh the market measures have fallen back also but to elevated levels. So something I'm focused on is to make sure that uh short-term inflation expectations don't contaminate don't seep into longer term inflation expectations. Okay. Well, let's uh shift then to the other part of the dual mandate. Uh so private forecasters are projecting a fall-off in growth in the second half of this year. I assume the dot plot uh embeds that all as well. Um I've heard officials suggest that uh the labor market is holding up well. Um, others have said that if uh labor market softness accelerated, the Fed may asymmetrically emphasize the maximum employment leg of the dual mandate. Um but there again um there are those who may suggest that uh the unemployment rate uh may hold steady because the supply of labor due to immigration um lower immigration flows is is weakening. So and that the demand could be falling but this but because of the supply offset the unemployment rate wouldn't change. So, is the labor market solid? Is it softening? Um, how does this feed into your view of the dual mandate? It's very important to maintain a uh very broad view of the labor market, not reduce it to one number, one statistic, and you have to look at at all of it. There's some uh very large gross flows that happen underneath the surface and and and that's really important to look at. As I said at the beginning, uh from my perspective, labor market is uh stable. Yep. at full employment which is a good place to be. Uh when you begin to look under the surface uh labor supply as you said um seems to be uh declining and you can see that in the participation rate has been declining. Uh it's possible that is related to lower immigration flows. It's possible that may be due to to other factors entry into the labor force. Um when you look at labor demand uh what the numbers say and also what I hear when I go around the country and around our district is you know companies with the uncertainty they've been facing this year have have held back on on hiring. So hiring trends have been have been have been um you know softer than than usual. So both supply and demand and labor markets seem to have cooled at the same time. On the demand side one thing that's interesting is uh vacancies have been rising lately. So, uh, while there's no or while the hiring is low, some some increase in vacancies, meaning, you know, more more jobs. Uh, which is interesting. Um, so, so in some, uh, we're in a low hiring, low firing environment. When I go around and I talk to companies, I talk to a lot of companies, uh, you know, I'm not hearing about layoffs. Mhm. Uh I'm hearing that uh folks are uh uh reluctant to do that uh because they faced severe labor shortages after after co co so uh they're reluctant to uh separate uh from their workers. Uh so that's that's how the labor market looks. Now there are some downside risks. You know firms will likely face profit margin pressures and uh you I'm watching the downside risk closely to the labor market. uh continuing claims for example continues to rise. This morning's number indicated that trend although new claims is stable or falling which is good news. Uh when you look at the warns uh layoff notices uh they ticked up a little bit. So that's something I'm watching. When we look underneath labor market report, hours worked ticked down. Uh compensation uh ticked down a little bit. Uh and when you look at private payrolls uh you can see some softness there. So there reasons to uh uh to be mindful of downside risks. Uh what do you think about the stagflation word? Oh, before we get there, you asked me about monetary policy and the labor market. uh so I think policy is is well positioned uh to respond to labor market uh weakness uh that is undesire you know undesired labor market weakness you know provided inflation underlying inflation can be expected to continue to converge towards towards 2% and inflation expectations remain uh anchored and you use the word asymmetric and I don't view it as asymmetric you know we have a dual mandate we we have to be alert to two things provided inflation expectations are anchored So, uh, is to me it's a feature of the the dual mandate, not a not an asymmetry to it. Okay. Well, the proponents of asymmetry have heard you speak. Um, again, stagflation. What do you think about that? So, I I don't think we're in a st a stagflationary environment. For me, you know, that term uh conotes uh inflation uh you know, much higher than here and unemployment much higher than here. Uh uh or where I expect it to be in the next uh 12 months or so. Uh so I think you know we we have uh risks of inflation moving higher and we have risks of the labor market softening. Uh I'm not seeing right now what I would call stagflation, which for me would be when the sum of unemployment and inflation is somewhere above nine. Okay. Uh we're not anywhere near that. All right. Um although maybe we'll need to retool definitions of stagflation from the 70s to the uh 21st century. Um you in your opening you said financial conditions are um moderately restrictive and um you know I I looked there's so many financial conditions indices and whatnot but I looked at the Chicago Fed one because that's publicly available and it didn't look all that it almost looked accommodative but then the argument is also made that with um Fed funds at its current range and even with inflation let's say 2 and 3/4 3% whatever it be that that is a not inconsiderable real um rate um would you care to elaborate a little bit on this issue of financial conditions and how you see them thank you so uh what I said at the beginning is that monetary policy is modestly restrictive Okay. And financial conditions are supportive, okay, of of economic activity. I did not say they were uh they were uh restrictive. So, I'm agreeing with you uh on your assessment. All right. Well, I need a lot of correcting. Well, we need to be precise in this job as as you know. So, uh so when I look at financial conditions, I I try to look at them in in two ways. I look at all the indices that you mentioned which are all based on on prices or yields determined in financial markets. And I also try to look at quantities of financing to the economy. I try to look at both things. So my assessment when I look at both whether as I look at many indices and I look at uh try to look at the sum of all the financing to the economy. When I look at both I see financial conditions that are supportive of economic growth. uh that's why uh if you think of the transmission from monetary policy to financial conditions to the real economy uh I'm not observing uh a tremendous amount of restrictiveness there uh and you know that that feeds into my assessment that monetary policy is modestly restricted um so um you know also the financial stability report uh that we released suggests that asset prices were elevated which is consistent with financial conditions being supportive of economic activity. Well, great. Well, that's a perfect segue into my next question, which is that um you know, we talk about the dual mandate of the Fed, but the Fed also has very significant financial stability responsibilities. Um and um my sense is that the last Fed financial stability report expressed concerns about high asset valuations as you mentioned limited liquidity in treasury markets uh the need for commercial real estate uh refinancings and hedge fund leverage. Um and then there are proposals out there now about the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio uh which uh could reduce GI capital. So going back to my past and working at the time of the global financial crisis, I um I I worry that uh financial regulators and supervisors may not have a full handle on non-bank financial institutions and including their interactions with the banking system. um and that was view was reinforced by Archeos and um Silicon Valley Bank etc. So I guess the question for you is uh a very broad question but anything you would like to amplify on of course is welcome but should Americans be concerned that we are forgetting the lessons of the global financial crisis? So um the the banking system is well capitalized today and it's liquid uh and u it's uh uh much in contrast to what happened at the eve of the global financial crisis where the banking system was not well capitalized and turned out it was illquid. Uh the 2025 stress test results were released recently as you know and you know they show that uh uh the largest 22 banks uh can withstand uh meaningful uh losses I think up to $550 billion if I'm not mistaken uh and continue to be well capitalized and continue to lend to households and businesses uh even after severe economic and markets uh shocks are are are simulated. Uh so that's something something important to keep in mind. Um in terms of uh non-bank financial institutions, so that is private equity, private credit, hedge funds, insurance, uh money market funds. It's it's a broad it's a broad you know set of of uh financial market participants. They have been growing uh very meaningfully since the global financial crisis. maybe in part because of the regulation uh on the uh on the banking system after the financial crisis and uh you know those risks financial stability risks need to be well monitored they need to be well understood um and um when we look at the exposure of banks I think you mentioned that uh to the non-bank financial uh institutions segment of the financial system uh it has been growing also as as that sector has been growing Um it stands at around 10% now of of total uh loans. Uh it is not particularly concentrated on any one segment of the non-bank financial institutions uh uh set. Uh it tends to be uh uh of investment grade quality. uh and it tends to be uh at a lower delinquency rate than exposures to non-financial institutions. Um also if you look at the stress tests uh they they show that the largest banks can withstand meaningful stress to their non-bank financial institutions uh portfolios and continue to be well capitalized and lend. So it's something that I'm certainly very interested in from a financial perspective. Uh there's been a you know when there's a high growth area of the financial system you have to watch it carefully and this has certainly been one. Um that is what uh I can share now. Okay. Well thank you for that. Well, I hope we're highly vigilant to the interactions between the banks and the non-bank financial intermediation seems a area that could always cause trouble if not well overseen. Um well, let me shift gears again on you. Um so uh so in econ 101 uh we learned that fiscal and monetary policy interact and that large deficits can push up medium and longer term rates and slow investment and the economy. Uh we're running very large fiscal deficits now some 6% of GDP and CBO projects that trend to continue for the foreseeable future. Um at the same time, you know, changes in official shortterm rates have limited influence on the long end of the curve. Um do you have thoughts on the implications of our current fiscal settings for the economy, yield curve, financial markets, the dual mandate? Uh so uh fiscal policy is not the domain of the Fed. Uh so I can't comment on the specifics. It's not my job to comment on the specifics of fiscal policy, but but I can say both at the IMF and there everything's about the fiscal monetary balance as you well remember so there there must be some interaction there so so uh fiscal deficits uh of around 6 and a half% uh for a sustained period of time at full employment uh when you compare that across countries and across time uh are large deficits and uh my assessment uh of the fiscal trajectory that the US has been been on for uh a number of years now, more than a decade now. So, this is uh you know something that's been going on for a while. It it's it's on an unsustainable trajectory and path. Absolutely. Um and you know if sustained over a long period of time and we were just talking about financial stability it could become sometime in the in the future a financial stability problem uh that uh I'm certainly uh looking at and uh you know trying to understand. Um so your other question was about the impact on markets. uh uh governments uh compete for funds with private sector borrowers in financial markets. Higher fiscal deficits mean more borrowing. Uh that competition for funds could push up uh interest rates, long-term interest rates uh which are beyond the Fed's control. Um um it is possible that uh fiscal uh large fiscal deficits could uh lead the public this is households, businesses and financial market participants uh to expect higher risks of of inflation. Uh that could require higher compensation for inflation in long-term interest rates. And if uh long-term interest rates stay high uh or rise, you know, that uh could limit uh growth and could limit uh employment. So, um well, good. Thank you for that. Uh and as you said, fiscal is not in the mandate of the fund. So, I will I'll move on and shift gears again um and to something that is in the Fed's remitt, which is the framework review. Um so I sometimes see blame ascribed to the 2021 framework uh as a contributor to high in the high inflation that we experience. Um I always felt that the last framework uh review was in a way designed to fight the last war the war of the great moderation. And even if one wishes to argue that the Fed was too late to respond, nobody could have foreseen the pandemic and its ramifications uh plus the impact of the fiscal large sum at the time. Um so I guess I have questions in my mind about the A and FIT whether the Fed funds rate is the proper target variable etc etc. But um what do you what are you thinking? What are your thoughts about the review? What would you like to see come out of it even though it's ongoing and it would probably be premature for to draw two definitive conclusions. So uh so the FOMC has been working on on the review since the beginning of the year. It's been a very thoughtful and very thorough u you know look at the monetary policy framework. Uh we've had some uh fascinating uh you know discussions. Uh there's been a consult broad consultation with stakeholders uh through Fed listens events around the country. Uh we've consulted with uh with academics. Uh we've had conferences. So it's a broad consultation uh on on how to think about this. Uh as you said the the fate flexible average inflation targeting framework uh that was released in 2019 uh was was very much designed with the asymmetry of the zero lowerbound nominal interest rates in mind and the risk of disinflation or or deflation uh as something that uh we should try to avoid. So it was very loaded on that that one scenario which we had been living in for 10 years uh at the time in in 2019. uh what I would u uh hope to see I can't prejudge the outcome uh because you know we're it's still ongoing but what I would uh like to see in a new framework is a framework that is more robust to different economic environments and more normal economic environments that are not the zero lower bound while at the same time being mindful that the zero lower bound asymmetry is still a possibility so not totally ignoring it but not totally focusing on it uh so that's what I would like to see uh come out of it. Oh, in terms of the federal funds rate, I think was your your other question. Well, I'm trying to draw you out on what you'd like to come out of it, but that's another thing that's on the docket as well as communications and and the like. Yeah, the way and I think uh Chair Powell said this at at a conference recently. So, the the framework review I I would expect it to be done by the end of the summer and then after that uh we are working on what communications may look like. uh and we'll be looking at that in the uh in the latter part of the year. Um your question on the Fed funds rate as the as the instrument uh the FOMC has been conducting monetary policy effectively uh with the federal funds rate as as its target. Uh and uh right now I know there are proposals there and views there that uh other interest rates ought to be other markets other parts of the money market ought to be uh considered as the target. uh right now the federal funds is being very effectively used and it's unclear to me that a transition to another instrument at this point in time uh would make monetary policy implementation more effective. Okay. So we can expect a fit but not fate fed perhaps. Maybe um uh since we just did mention instruments a little bit uh and this gets into a very technical area of balance sheets in the Fed, but you worked at the New York Fed, so you're undoubtedly familiar with monetary policy operations and whatnot. Um, so there there seems to be talk about um going from um is it abundant reserves to ample reserves? I don't know what these distinctions mean, but they're general concepts. Um but maybe you can just elucidate all of that for us. But is there much farther to go? What should we be looking for? Um and I noticed recently some proposals on the in political circles about um paying interest on excess reserves and and whatnot. And and I was wondering when I read them if one could run the the current Fed system uh without paying excess uh paying interest on uh excess reserve balances and and the like. So what can you tell us about the framework about the uh the balance sheet and where it's headed? Uh that is a a lot of technical questions there. So uh the balance sheet reduction has been ongoing. Uh the uh draining reserves has been ongoing and it's been uh happening in a smooth effective way uh for some time. Um the um what abundant reserves means is that there are sufficient reserves in the system such that the equilibrium in the money market is occurring in the flat part of the demand curve for reserves. And what ample reserves means is that the money market is operating uh at an equilibrium that is no longer at the flat part of the demand curve for reserves, but rather begins to get into the the less flat or maybe steeper part of of the demand curve for for reserves. Uh nobody knows where that transition uh will be because demand it depends on where the demand curve is at any point in time. uh we uh the FOMC monitors that and the New York uh desk monitors very carefully uh many indicators to help us understand whether we're in the flat part of the demand curve for reserves or beginning to get into the steeper part of the of the demand curve. Uh thus far uh it appears that we continue to be in the in the abundant reserves uh part of of of the money market or the money market is an abundant reserve state. uh so we will know when we get signals that the uh the the demand curve for reserves is becoming uh steeper. What would that signal be? So so the the New York Fed monitors exactly that the elasticity of uh the dem of of reserves to to interest rates. So that's the slope of of the of the demand curve for reserves and uh you know we monitor also many other indicators. So it's a it's a multi-dimensional monitoring to understand whether we may be transitioning from one regime to another. Uh uh you may have noticed that uh there was a reduction in the rate of balance sheet rolloff uh earlier in the year and the idea was to make sure that when we get to that uh transition that the transition is is smooth and not not abrupt. Um you asked a question about uh the second part of the question was interest on oh I so um uh if uh if interest on reserves went away suddenly uh banks would reduce commercial banks would reduce uh their levels of reserves and that would inject liquidity into uh the money market and to maintain interest rate control the Fed would then probably have to sell uh uh treasury securities in the market to reduce liquidity. Mh. Uh so um u the ample reserves or abundant reserves regime requires interest on reserves for interest rate control. uh that transition from uh what would be an ample reserves to let's say a scarce reserves uh if the IAR went uh to zero could be uh disruptive and could be a difficult transition and if we were to operate in a scarce reserves uh regime which uh which the Fed did uh before the glo financial crisis uh managing uh uh managing liquidity in the money market requires uh more active open market operations ations uh to uh adjust to shifts in the demand curve or in the demand for reserves. So it's a more it requires more active management and um uh a uh the benefit of an ample reserves regime with uh IER is that it allows the Fed uh to inject liquidity quickly into the market if there's a need for quick liquidity injection without uh losing interest rate control. In other words, without compromising monetary policy so that's the benefit of it. Thank you. He has a very valuable explanation for for the public that I haven't heard from a Fed official before. Um Okay. Well, um, so when we first met and, uh, you were working at the IMF, um, and then then you became, uh, a hedge fund manager and you invested globally. So, so you are no stranger to international uh, economic trends. So, you know, I recall in the '9s, um, if one asks the Fed what role international developments played in monetary policy, I I remember, uh, this Green Spanian line about considering them to the extent that they impacted the dual mandate and the optimal functioning of the US economy. And at the time when I heard it I felt that he was he had mainly in his mind you know the real channel. Um but since then we've gone through uh global financial crisis the pandemic the dollar is the dominant global currency. um and we've seen how potent the financial channels can be in in international uh ramifications and influences. So, how do you think about um international developments and the dual mandate? Um, and then very more technically and specifically, what I I've heard a lot read a lot of stories lately about voices that are ringing their hands about how the Fed might suspend its overseas swap lines. I don't really understand those stories, but I if you had anything to say on that as well. A lot of questions there uh on uh on international. So what the FOMC is squarely focused on is is the dual mandate and achieving maximum employment and price stability for for the American people. That's that's what we do. Now the US is undoubtedly very connected to the rest of the world. Uh uh perhaps less so through exports and imports but very much so through capital flows and investment flows in and out of the country. Whether it's American businesses and households investing abroad or whether it's foreign households and business investing in the US there's there's a big connection the financial channel there is is very connected as you know we have the uh the deepest uh largest real economy markets and financial markets in the world it's also the most innovative uh economy in the world so not surprisingly foreign investors want to invest um in the US so there there are a lot of connections uh we monitor I monitor financial developments uh constantly whether they are you know through the real side or through the financial uh channel to understand how they can impact uh our dual mandate so employment and inflation uh you know at FOMC meetings we spent a meaningful part of the meeting looking at what's happening in other parts of the world and how that can affect us so uh a lot of investors want to hold US assets because again it's a very innovative economy. Uh they fund those assets sometimes in US dollars. So they need to borrow in US dollars to be able to invest uh in in our markets. Um and uh you mentioned uh the dollar dollar swap lines. Um in times of stress, the dollar swap lines, which by the way are collateralized lending, so they're safe lending, right? Uh the dollar swap lines allow foreign central banks to lend to foreign investors that want to invest in US markets and US assets. So dollar swap lines help with financial stability for US markets and US assets and financial stability is a good thing for US households and US businesses. Thank you. Um it's it struck me that in times of stress the uh the Fed's become the reluctant global lender of last resort. But the swap line's very important and I think you make uh very strongly the point that the swap lines are in the interests of the health of the United States of America. It's an important point. Um okay. Um you're the president of the St. Louis Fed. Um so first of all the St. Louis Fed is known around the world for Fred and it is a phenomenal global public good. I have nothing but the highest appraise for Fred. So uh so keep that up. Uh keep maintaining Fed and its excellence. Um well maybe you could tell us something about um the challenges facing the region and um and then I'm going to um ask you a broader question about being a regional Fed president and monetary policy. Um so um you formulate US policy, monetary policy along with others. Um and of course a country can only have one monetary policy. You can't have a St. Louis monetary policy and a San Francisco monetary policy. But being head of the St. Louis Fed and understanding the region uh must impact and influence you somehow when you go into uh the FOMC. So I was I was wondering how how you balance those uh consideration. How how does being a regional president trying to make national monetary policy um weigh on you? So so so three questions there. Well, one one I got to get in as many as I can. Albert, one accolade, which is Fred. So, so thank you for recognizing Fred and for the plug for Fred. Our team puts a tremendous amount of effort into FRED and we view it as a critical tool for economic education, free economic education. And so, thank you for that. Um, in terms of of the region, our region is very diverse. So, the 8th district has uh seven state or parts of seven states. uh uh you know from the north of the country to the south of the country from you know the west part of the eastern part of the country to the eastern part of the western part of the country and so it's very diverse and uh there are some uh areas that are doing very well there are areas that are that are more challenged and uh you know we try to visit uh you know visit with everyone and make sure that we're uh gathering everyone's uh all the use of stakeholders uh on um on how we do monetary policy on how to balance the the regional views with with the national views. You know, as I as I so I meet with a rich rich uh set of stakeholders in preparation for every FOMC meetings. Uh a lot of those stakeholders are in our district, but I also meet with stakeholders that are you know national and global. Um, interestingly, uh, even when meeting with stakeholders from our district, uh, you know, some of the largest logistics companies in the world are in this district, some of the largest retailers in the world are in this district and they're have global operations. So, even going around the district, you get the local view and you also get the global view. Uh so I bring that to that informs my FOMC views along with a lot of sophisticated modeling and data watching but also the impressionistic view and uh I share my uh uh regional national and global views uh at the FOMC. Other presidents do the same and that's required. I mean that's the beauty of the uh of the federal decentralized federalized system of the Federal Reserve is this is a large country a complex economy and it's important to bring all the views from all the regions to the table and uh nobody argues for you know let's say monetary policy for my district uh we all recognize that it's a complex country we put all the views uh from around the country and to formulate a a monetary policy for the country interestingly uh when we are sharing these views and debating these views. Uh sometimes you know there's there there are a lot of people around the table and sometimes there are a lot of similarities in what you're hearing across uh districts particularly around turning points. You kind of hear uh one district say one thing and the other district says something very similar unexpectedly and so and sometimes they're they're they're big differences. out uh and that's the beauty of uh you know many views many perspectives uh you know to form the best informed decision okay I think that's uh there there have been debates about do we need this uh comprehensive regional fed structure and whatnot and I think you just made an eloquent uh defense of of that um we had said that at the end we would have some time for audience questions and uh they've been filtering into me and um there seemed to be just tons of questions about tariffs. Um now you dealt with tariffs quite a bit in your earlier answers, but there are many more questions about um how do you track pass through? Um, do you have times in mind when you're going to be looking for uh when tariff is being seen in inflation or you might come to the view that the Fed is behind the curve, questions about supply chain disruptions and whatnot. Um, I could go on and on, but it seems to be a very popular uh question, including about whether uh your community contacts and how much they specifically they've had to say to you about tariffs and inflation and whatnot. So, um, in view of these audience questions, would you like to elaborate on your views on tariffs and inflation and and whatnot? Thank you. So um on supply chain disruptions uh we're not hearing a lot of that in our in our conversations and you know there are many indices out there of supply chain disruptions and they're also not suggesting a lot of supply chain disruptions. Um as I said uh when we started uh we hear a lot of companies particularly larger companies not so much smaller companies did build a lot of inventories at the beginning of the year and did pull through a lot of a lot of their imports. So that contributes to uh uh no supply disruptions at this point that can be observed in terms of measuring disentangling uh you know what is underlying inflation, what is an indirect impact, what is a pass through uh and what is a second round effect. That's hard to do. It's really hard to do. You know, our teams are doing that and they're looking at uh prices by different types of goods, goods that have been tariffed, good that that goods that have not been tariffed and they're trying to parse out, you know, what is the tariff impact and so far so far it's mild. uh although we only have two months of of of price data after April and as I said at the beginning the actual tariffs being paid at the border right have only been increasing uh you know linearly towards the expected low teens or somewhere between low teens and low 20s. So it's early uh to to uh uh to understand the full effects. And um do you have like a I think you already kind of said this uh towards the end of the year versus first quarter of next year that's kind of when you would expect to have a more comprehensive view of the uh fullness of the impact of tariffs as we now understand them. uh in terms of uh the inflationary impact. Um and there was there was another question about there's trade deals and and how they might pan out, but there seems to be so much uncertainty uh when one really can't figure that out. Um so uh is that is that the right time frame to look at is towards the end of the year first quarter of next year for uh for the uh the inflation impact from tariffs um based upon what you'd expect today and again these are questions are filtering in. You're popular on tariffs. So every every piece of information helps. Uh we can't uh you know we can't have analysis paralysis where where we are waiting to have 100% clarity on everything before uh the nature of central banking is decision-m under certainty. Uh I think as we progress through the year u I'm going to get more comfortable understanding what the the total impact of of tariffs uh uh may be. uh I expect that to begin to show up in data uh with uh June, July, August, September data. I don't expect it to be the end of it, but it's possible I may be able to form a picture by October, November, December. Um it's possible I may not uh form a picture. Again, I'm not looking for a complete certainty, but I'm looking for uh sufficient confidence in one direction or another. Okay. Um let me um just put to you a question from left field and u because it's an important part of the monetary policy discussions these days. Um, and I know that there's a lot of activity in Congress and you wouldn't want to comment on that, but just uh, you know, do you have any what are you willing to tell us about your thinking on stable coins and uh, central bank digital currencies? So, so on the latter uh, uh, there's an executive order that precludes the Fed from uh, being engaged in in uh, central bank digital currencies. Uh, so at present we're not uh, doing any work on that. um uh on on stable coins, you know, they're an interesting innovation in terms of the payment system of the US and the and the world. It's very interesting technology. You know, we have a um an act or bill going through uh Congress right now uh to provide a regulatory framework uh for stable coins. Um uh we may uh be a regulator uh in that in that act. Uh we're observing it. It's too soon to to to conclude. Uh uh but it's a great thing that there's going to be a framework a regulatory framework around this uh because stable coins could become a very important part of the payment system. We've already seen uh you know very large two very large retailers saying that they're studying uh issuing stable coins. Uh we've seen very large banks uh saying they are studying issuing stable coins. I've heard uh uh uh from uh uh bankers in Europe, large bankers in Europe saying that they're thinking of issuing dollar-based stable coins uh in Europe. Uh so it's a it's a very interesting development uh that we need to uh you know be on the front foot of and and understand well. Okay, I have last question then for you. This is in the motherhood and apple pie category. It's an easy one for you. But um you know the Fed has instrument independence obviously um Congress sets a dual mandate. The chair testifies um Fed chair and vice chairs and the board of governors uh go through an accountability process with the Senate for appointments and whatnot. Um but again you have instrument independence. Um I I I would take it you're a big believer in central bank independence. So one of the questions was for the public uh you know what what are the benefits of uh central bank independence and are you true believer in it? So central bank independence is really important uh because if you look at empirical evidence across many countries and many years so a lot of data uh uh countries that have had more independent central banks have delivered uh better inflation and better employment outcomes for the people they serve meaning lower and more stable inflation and higher and more stable employment. So that's that's well documented. as you said, I I worked at the IMF in a a long time ago and I I also worked at an investment company where I we invested in countries all over the world. So I also observed that empirical evidence to be true in my own in my own uh you know career. Uh so it's it's an important thing and it's important because uh going back to inflation expectations, countries with more independent central banks uh are able to control inflation expectations and keep them anchored better. And if they can keep inflation expectations anchored better, that means they can be more responsive to employment and activity when there are shocks to the economy. So it's it's a good thing uh to be able to do that. Um, central bank independence as you said comes with accountability, must have accountability, must have transparency. Uh, and as you said very well, we at the Fed have instrument and operational independence. Uh, but the goals uh, of maximum employment and price stability are set by Congress and there's accountability to Congress. Well, thank you for that. Oh, we've come to the end of our time and plus you probably have a real day job to do instead of talking to me. Um uh this has been a wonderful interview. Um I hope it's given the public uh or more people in the public the chance to see how bright, thoughtful, um and uh you are and how much wealth of experience you bring to the current job. So I thank you for that. Thank you to the uh St. Lewis Federal Reserve Bank and all of your team for helping out and tremendous thanks to you and it's great to see you and it's a great reminder that when we first met um in the late 90s I was asking you lots of questions then and here we are almost 30 years later and I'm still getting the great opportunity to ask you questions. Mark, it's great to have you in St. Louis. It's great to catch up again. Maybe one day I can interview you. Well, um, I won't have anything nearly as intelligent and profound to say as you. Thank you, Mark. It's great to have you here. Thank you.