https://www.stlouisfed.org/-/media/project/frbstl/stlouisfed/musalem/2025/musalem_fedlistens2025_welcomingremarks_final.pdf?sc_lang=en&hash=A0317981F7C3311ACF102A6073121FFF

Prepared Welcoming Remarks

April 23, 2025

Alberto G. Musalem 

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, whether you are a first-time visitor or a veteran participant of the Bank’s events. I would also like to welcome those who are joining us via livestream for this morning’s remarks and later for the report-out session. Today’s event is entitled “Fed Listens,” because we want to hear from you how people and communities across the Eighth Federal Reserve District are experiencing the economy and monetary policy. We also want to hear how we can improve. Specifically, we are asking for your input to help us better understand the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy and how we might best serve the American people. Every five years or so, the Federal Reserve engages in a review of its monetary policy framework. Congress has assigned two policy objectives to the Fed—maximum employment and price stability. The policy framework describes the Fed’s approach for implementing monetary policy to achieve those objectives. The framework has elements that don’t change, including the goals set by Congress. It also includes elements that have changed over time as the Fed’s monetary policy committee—the FOMC—has refined its approach in response to new information, changes in the economic environment and lessons from experience. Fed Listens events were held around the United States in 2019 and 2020 as part of the last major framework review. The information gathered from those events helped the FOMC in its efforts to improve its framework. For today’s event, we have convened members of the Bank’s four Industry Councils, with representatives from agribusiness, health care, real estate and transportation; our Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council; and our Community Development Advisory Council. We are asking each participant to share perspectives on labor market conditions, inflation, and the communication and transmission of monetary policy. They will undoubtedly provide us with valuable insights about how the economy and monetary policy are affecting people’s lives and livelihoods across our region. In addition to special events like Fed Listens, the St. Louis Fed routinely engages with business and community leaders, bankers, educators and others in communities throughout the Eighth District. Our colleagues at other Federal Reserve banks do the same in their districts, and we work together to understand economic conditions in all parts of the United States. The genius of the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve System is that it allows and encourages us to be closely in touch with the people we serve. Of course, our colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., are also in contact with the public through various events and forums. I’m pleased to introduce Federal Reserve Governor Christopher Waller, who will be participating in today’s meeting. Governor Waller is no stranger to the St. Louis Fed or the Eighth District, having served for many years as this Bank’s director of research prior to joining the Board of Governors in December 2020. Before coming to St. Louis, Governor Waller had a distinguished academic career as a faculty member in economics departments at Indiana University, the University of Kentucky, and the University of Notre Dame, where he was the Gilbert F. Schaefer Chair of Economics and a research fellow with Notre Dame’s Kellogg Institute for International Studies. Before turning it over to Governor Waller for his remarks, I want to again thank you all for joining us today and for giving us the benefit of your insights and wisdom. At the St. Louis Fed, we are committed to a strong and resilient economy that works for all. That is why I am so grateful for the time you have taken to share your perspective. I look forward to hearing the reports from this morning’s sessions when we gather after lunch.