https://www.stlouisfed.org/annual-report/2024/presidents-message

In Service to the Eighth District and Nation

April 9, 2025

Alberto Musalem

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

Since joining the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis in April 2024, I have been struck by the incredible work taking place at this great institution in service to the American public. This report provides an opportunity to reflect on my first year leading this outstanding team and the privilege of getting to know people and communities across the Eighth Federal Reserve District.

Engaging with Main Street
I have spent much of my first year in different parts of the District, meeting with people we serve. During these important conversations, I hear directly from businesspeople, community leaders and households about how they are experiencing the economy. I also help people understand more about the work we do at the Bank. That type of ongoing engagement in the District is a vital aspect of our role.

Over the past year, I have learned a great deal about the rich variety of businesses in the Eighth District, from logistics and health care to artificial intelligence and life sciences. And those conversations have given me perspective that goes well beyond the Eighth District. Many organizations in the District have international operations, so I often learn about the global economy from my discussions with Eighth District business leaders. I have been impressed by the vibrant, connected business community found throughout the St. Louis Fed’s seven-state District.

Representing the District at the FOMC
The information I hear when engaging with Main Street helps shape my views on the economy and monetary policy. I often relay these insights during Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings. My fellow Federal Reserve bank colleagues do the same and share invaluable insights based on what they are hearing from their regional contacts.

It is an honor to represent the Eighth District at the FOMC table and contribute to monetary policy decisions that impact the American people. My FOMC colleagues and I remain focused on doing all we can to achieve our dual mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.

A Vision of Service
While one of our most critical roles is contributing to the nation’s monetary policy, the people of our Bank also work with others throughout the Federal Reserve System to foster a safe, sound and stable financial system; advance a safe, efficient and accessible payments system; promote consumer protection and community development; and support the U.S. Treasury as a fiscal agent. Every day, I am inspired by the talent and hard work of our employees. They bring excellence, humility and a tireless focus on making a broad and positive impact for the American people. Our vision makes clear what we are working to achieve: We are committed to a strong and resilient economy for all.

Looking Ahead
The last year has provided many great opportunities to listen, learn and establish partnerships. As we move forward, it will be even more important to deepen our connections to those we serve. Hearing perspectives from you and other stakeholders will help ensure our work has the greatest possible impact—for the people of the Eighth District and the nation.