https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/Town-hall-with-Neel-Kashkari-at-the-Chippewa-Falls-Area-Chamber-of-Commerce

Town hall with Neel Kashkari at the Chippewa Falls Area Chamber of Commerce

October 21, 2024

Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin

Neel Kashkari

well, Neil. um, I was going to introduce you by saying, um, president of fed. he's had uh, public and private jobs, um great family and head into pikia to get the rest, but I knew Ron would not be happy of that, so, um, I had. I do have a former little and it's small, okay on it. um, Neil is president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, one of the fed's 12 Banks. the Minneapolis Fred serves the public by pursuing a growing economy that works for all of us, and the banks District includes Minnesota, The Dakotas, Montana, Northern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Neil serves as a member of the federal hen Market Committee, which sets the nation's monetary policy. Neil began as a career as an Aeros Space Engineering developing technology for NASA space missions. he later held a variety of roles in public service and finance, most notably as assistant Secretary of the Treasury during the 2008 financial crisis, where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program known as tarp Neils of his wife, two young children and new Funland dog in Arona, Minnesota, and also, um, um, Neil and I have something in common: uh, we both like fast car and hard rock, so, uh, go ahead, Neil. well, uh, thank you, Jerry, and and thank you all for being here, appreciate the chamber hosting us. um, the Minneapolis fed, just as Jerry said, is part of our nation's Central Bank and part of the reason that I'm here is that our jobs at the Minneapolis fed are to represent all of you. so when Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913, they didn't want the Central Bank simply housed in the nation's capital. they wanted it spread out around the country. so all the different regions of the country had a direct voice in the policy process. so, Jerry, talk you about the region that we represent. you're an important part of that region and meetings like this are a way from us to a way for us to hear from you about what's happening here in your local economy. and then, when I go back to Washington DC every 6 weeks to set interest rates for the nation, part of what I'm doing in those meetings is I'm talking about what's happening here in our regional economy. so I really appreciate you being here and we're going to have open Q&A, which can also be you offering me comments. the more direct you are with me and my colleagues, the more I'm going to be able to learn from you. I'll say a few more things each of the 12 Reserve Banks has a board of directors, and the board of directors is made up of business and Civic leaders from around the region. we're really pleased, number one, to have Jerry, uh representing all of you on our board of directors. he, he might call a bunch of you before meetings and we'll we'll say to Jerry: hey, Jerry, we're we're wondering about where wages are going and can you ask your contacts, and then Jerry will go off and make a dozen pH phone calls to collect this insight and then bring that back to our board meetings so that we can talk about it. we also have several other directors here, uh, from the Minneapolis fed and a bunch of my colleagues, from my staff who are here who are, uh, very interested in hearing what you have to say. and so we really appreciate our board of directors and we appreciate all of you loaning Jerry to us. uh, he really represents you very well and takes the role very seriously. now, Ron, who started out, talked about some questions I'm going to ask you. I'm going to go to these questions now and get your phones out, cuz we're going to need your phones to answer them. this will be a nice way to set up our conversation. so the first question is: which of these best describes you: employer, worker, student. are you looking for work, not working, but not retired, or retired? just to level set, who's in the audience here in this room? okay, looks like about 2third of you are, uh, you consider yourself employees working somewhere and about a third of you are the employers of those folks and and just a couple folks are retired and one looking for work. let's go to the next question. okay, how is business activity this summer and fall compared with last year? much weaker, somewhat weaker? little and no change. somewhat stronger, much stronger. okay, looks like somewhat weaker, is the overwhelming sentiment. next question: how would you describe labor demand in the Chipawa Valley? strong to poor? okay, so evenly split between strong, healthy, but getting weaker and stable. uh, looks like very few of you are saying that it's poor or declining. next question: okay, word cloud. one to three words. what's the biggest challenge facing the local economy here? one to three words. you got to type in a word. so labor, housing and inflation keep popping up in different orders. so labor, I I'm going to interpret as the availability of Labor. housing is a big challenge everyone in the the country. and then inflation: Workforce is getting some as well, which is obviously related to labor. okay, next question- this might be the last one, I think. uh, where are you feeling inflation the most? where is it most painful? so we see a lot of groceries, Health Care, housing, food, I mean. well, groceries is getting split up between groceries, plural, grocery food. um, I think those all count the same. fuel costs have come down, so it's not as high there. okay, great, is that the last one? what one more? uh, what's your outlook for the economy over the next six months? very optimistic to very pessimistic? okay, looks like somewhat optimistic is the largest, but then, um, somewhat pessimistic is down there. so I would say neutral to somewhat positive is how I would, how I would balance out this chart. okay, thanks very much. um, really appreciate you. uh, taking time to enter in those results. very interesting, just to get a snapshot of what people are feeling like right now. um, Jerry, do you have you want to start off with some questions and then we just dive into it more? yeah, I think we can. um, there is. uh, if you want to raise your hand. uh, there is a couple mics uh, um, in the room and they will come to your table. um, Neil, I'm going to ask you a question first. so, um, we know the FED, um, and politics are not at all. the FED always does not play a difference with politics. looks at the facts, uh. but politics do one thing: they um, um affect fiscal expenditures. um, what I'd like to take- and I'm not going to use the, the, I'm going to use one that's um, a, a bipartisan fiscal one, not tariffs, um, I'm going to use um deficits, um, I think we all know that um, it's about 930 uh billion dollars to pay interest on the debt this next year, higher than Social Security and Medicare, higher in defense, and it keeps climbing and the deficits keep climbing. how do you look, not at 25, how it's affecting monetary policy, but the long range, when you start looking at long range monetary policy- not the dot chart stuff, that's all short range, but the long range, how do you look at deficits in your thinking? well, the deficits that Congress and the executive branch, whatever they decide our spending is, whatever, how much they tax us, how much they spend what they spended on, that's completely their domain. but we take that as an input into our analysis of the US economy when we try to analyze what is the US economy's potential to grow? how much inflation would there likely be? what's the outlook for weight and the labor force? so it's an important input. now, if you look at forecasts by, for example, the nonpartisan Congressional budget office on where deficits are forecast to go over the next 20 years, it's through the roof. I mean, it's all, almost all, driven by our entitlement spending and that Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid predominantly, but also interest cost Etc. the deficit just goes up and, up, and, up and up. ultimately, that's not sustainable and Congress and the president- whoever the president is, whoever the Congress is- will have to come together and figure out a way to balance that. completely up to them. but whatever they decide to do will go into our analysis of the underlying dynamics of the US economy. and so if the deficit is going to keep growing and growing and growing, all else being equal, that would crowd out resources to spend on other things and, on the margin, that would probably mean that the interest rate environment will be higher. and so, again, I'm not saying good or bad. we just have to respond to that and balance out the economy so that we don't overheat the economy or we don't have an economy that's growing too slowly. what are we trying to achieve? we're trying to achieve what we call our dual mandate that Congress has told us to achieve, one of which is stable prices, which is 2% inflation. the other is maximum employment, as many Americans gainfully employed and contributing. usually those things are like sides of a seesaw that we're trading off each other. but if the deficit goes to the moon, the way is forecast- then, on the margin, interest rates will probably be higher to balance these things out, any? we got any questions here. um, all good, can you hear me? there you go okay, so kind of on the same thing, but not looking at deficits. um, when you look at the Dual mandate, how do you factor in international noise? well, we get a lot of data. so, before the, the Federal Open Market Committee meets every six weeks, and before every meeting we get about a 100 pages of analysis from our colleagues, the economists who work in Washington DC and other economists working around the Federal Reserve System, and that analysis looks in depth at the US economy but also looks at what what's happening all around the world. now, we're not an island, so if the rest of the world is growing more slowly, that probably means that many of the businesses in this room that are manufacturers exporting your exports are going to be lower. that probably means you're going to be hiring fewer people to build those exports, to feed those markets. so we care a lot about what's happening in the global economy because ultimately it matters back for America. and you're right, there's always noise in the data. there's noise in the international data, there's noise in our own data, you know, is the economy growing? Gang Busters? is it growing slowly? is the labor Market weakening? we're always getting confusing signals. SO meetings like this can actually be helpful to try to figure out where's the signal from all the noise that we're getting and that happens internationally and that happens here at home, and then we, we make our use, our best judgment, to try to understand where is the underlying economy headed. thanks for asking. I have a. I have a follow-up question to that, though. so, uh, your decisions are based on getting good data. as we go more into- like cryptocurrency, we're more the transactions are kind of happened outside of the formal channels. can the FED get data from those kind of transactions? well, um, you're right, there's a lot of activity that's happening. the nature of the economy is changing, and so we're always having to Pioneer new data sources to give us insight into what's happening. I don't think crypto because almost I mean I I don't want to. you're going to pull my thread on crypto and I'm going to go off on a little speech about crypto, which I don't want to do, but if you force me to, I'll be willing to do it. um, but very few transactions are actually happening on crypto. people are buying crypto and they're selling crypto, but they're not paying for goods and services using crypto. it it almost never happens, unless people are buying drugs or other illegal activities. um, but there are many new activities that are happening and we're constantly having to Pioneer new data sources to try to understand what's really happening in the underlying economy. I'll give you a very, very simple example. when we had this huge inflation surge, one of the big surprises was how much housing inflation shot up. and as we dug into it to really understand what are the drivers of housing inflation, we realized, uh, that if you look at new rents and new leases- so if you went out, got an apartment today, what is the inflation on those leases- it should be a pretty good forecaster for overall housing inflation as the universe of leases turns over over the next 12 to 24 months. so now, one of the things that look at to try to get some sense of where is housing going are different measures of new lease rates. so, for example, Zillow is a company you probably heard of. an online company didn't exist 20 years ago, I don't think, uh, and they're a source of data for us to try to get a sense of where do we think housing inflation is going over the next 12 months to 24 months. that's just one example of many where we have to constantly look at new sources of information to try to figure out where the economy is headed, because the economy is constantly changing. and so you're- you're absolutely right about that- um, a little different than crypto, but there's been a lot of talk about digital currency, um, changing to a digital currency. uh, is that still something that's on the table and could you just speak to that a little bit, please? sure, so there's been a um. some central banks have announced that they want to launch what's called a central bank digital currency, excuse me. and at the Fed, we're studying what other central banks are doing to try to understand it. uh, digital currencies, digital dollars, exist today, so I could send anybody in this room right now $5 with venmo or PayPal, and you probably use those types of services all the time already. so the private sector has already created these type of digital currencies using the Legacy payment systems that we have in the United States. the central bank is not issuing that, your bank is issuing it, and venmo and PayPal, Etc. so the question that I have is: what would a central bank digital currency do that venmo and PayPal can't already do? and nobody's been able to answer that question to me. you know, we know that there's a problem in America where there's some small percentage of Americans are quote, unquote, unbanked. so they have some job, maybe they get paid in cash, maybe they have to go to a Payday lender. they don't have a formal bank account, they don't have a credit card. that's a legitimate problem, and some people say, well, maybe a central bank digital currency would help solve that problem, but no one has offered any evidence that it would help solve that problem. so there's a bunch of things like that that I think are worth studying, but I haven't seen any evidence that any of these actual problems in real life get made smaller or better by the Federal Reserve issuing a central bank digital currency. the bottom line is, at the end of the day, ultimately, even if we wanted to, Congress would have to authorize us to do it. it'd have to be a decision by our elected bodies to do it, and then we could consider it. right now, it's simply a a topic of study to understand what other central banks are doing and why? question: Jerry, it looks like you get to ask the next question. um, Neil? um, it's not quite KN, um, um, but the bankers on your board- never which? Jean is here, Crane and Brenda are not in the room, um, when they're discussing banking on it, because it would be a conflict interest. so we're not in that room right now. so, uh, um, my question is: um, what is your feeling on the supervision levels? um, from very complex and- and when I'm not talking safety and soundness as much as the other issues- on from the very large Banks down to the banks that are 00 million. on that, you know our supervisors work really hard to try to make sure that banks are following the rules and that are operating in a safe and sound manner, but Banks make mistakes and we make mistakes. we don't always get it right, and the most visible example of this was a year and a half ago, when Silicon Valley Bank in Silicon Valley got into a crisis. they had loaded up on long-term bonds. interest rates went up, the value of those bonds went down. that wiped out their Equity, kind of on a marketto market basis, and that scared a lot of their customers, who then pull their money out. and then, talking about online payments and these kinds of transactions, the what we call the speed of the Run- how fast people were able to pull out money- was unprecedented, and then that led to concerns about other banks that might have similar exposures. so that's an example where clearly the bank didn't get it right, but I would say we didn't get it right in overseeing the bank and making sure that they were only taking risk. that they fully understood, and so I think, overall, our supervisors do a good job. uh, they work very hard, they're very conscientious about their work, but they are human. we are human. we make mistakes and hopefully we can learn from our mistakes so that we avoid repeating them. I will say this: in 2008- Jerry mentioned this in my bio- I was one of the First Responders in the 2008 financial crisis. I was at the US Treasury Department. I was shocked that. so the major banking crisis happens in 2008, then in 2020, when covid hit, financial markets were also facing massive fragility because of the pandemic. the Federal Reserve had to step in to stabilize markets. and then 2023, we had to step in again to stabilize Regional Banks, which there was a lot of concern about some of those, some of the regional Banks, and so it's frustrating for me that, as focused as we have been and continue to be on banking, that problems continue to emerge, and so I just think we're not done. questions, other questions or comments about: how are you finding the economy? we saw onethird of you are, consider, self employers. 2third, uh, are workers. you know what's it like to being a worker in Chipawa Valley. if your employers are in the room and that's why you're not speaking up, we'll give you a, we'll give you a pass question over here or maybe go ahead. so four years ago, we were together and we were talking about, you know, Co and all this, and the word of the day was: transitory. right, inflation was transitory. so what have we learned since then? and you know, we've come through such a tumultuous time and now we're unwinding that. so what are the lessons that you've learned? uh, as a fed, well, my less. one of my biggest lessons from the inflation episode is, excuse me, going into the pandemic. we struggled because we kept thinking we're at maximum employment and meanwhile the unemployment rate kept ticking down from 4 and a half to four all the way down to three and a half, and yet inflation didn't really budge. we didn't get- we didn't even get- 2% inflation. we were stuck at around 1.5 or 1.6% inflation. and that was an odd thing that was happening. you know, maybe we weren't really at maximum employment and that's why inflation didn't come. and then Co hit, then Supply chains got screwed up and then inflation soared and we called it transitory- me too, by the way, I was part of the transitory team. so what? what ended up happening? what ended up happening is it was not the labor market that caused the inflation, and most of our energy, my energy- has focused on understanding how do wages lead to inflation? and if the labor market gets really tight and the unemployment rate drops, unemployment rate drops and wages go up, that's going to cause inflation. so we're looking, but that's not what caused the inflation. the inflation was a constellation of events. so during covid, when the services economy was shut, couldn't go to restaurants, you weren't getting on airplanes, people were stuck home by and large. so we all shifted our behavior and were buying goods online. so the the balance in the economy shifted away from services and towards Goods. that had never happened before. and then the goods Supply chains for those very goods was disrupted because of the pandemic. so we're overloading the good sector at a time when the good sector is disrupted because of Supply chains. those are both inflationary. you also had a l lot of stimulus put in the economy because folks thought- I thought- the pandemic would last a lot longer. the vaccines that came along came along much sooner than expected, which short- thankfully shortened the pandemic, but that meant that there's probably more stimulus than was needed. that was inflationary. and then you had Russia invading Ukraine, sending commodity prices to the roof. that was inflationary. so each one of those individually was inflationary. you put them all together and it was a huge inflationary pulse that shut way up, and then it took a lot longer to unwind than we had expected. and so what's the lesson? for me, one lesson is just a reminder that there are many different sources of potential inflation. it's not just the labor market, uh, or it's not. the other one that we focus a lot on are inflation expectations. so this is a tricky thing in economics. if you and I all believe that inflation is going to be high, then we're going to go to our employers and say: you need to pay me more because inflation is coming. and if we all demand that, then your employer is going to have to turn around and charge his or her customers more, and then it becomes a self-fulfilling spiral, and so keeping inflation expectations anchored at 2% is really, really important. we were monitoring inflation expectations throughout this episode. they stayed anchored, and so it's a long answer to your question. my big takeaway is: yes, inflation expectations are absolutely amount. they matter a lot. yes, the labor market matters a lot to understanding inflation, but there are a lot of other sources of inflation too, and that was a a rude reminder of the last few years. well, you're talking about inflation, de. why don't you um make some um comments? I know you have at the board level um regarding um people's conception of inflation. um, we're looking at inflation. that um, um. I saw groceries up there, but we're looking at inflation of groceries for next year. we're not looking um, and people are having a hard time. I think, understanding that they're thinking the FED is going to bring grocery prices down. it's not. yeah, it's a great Point, Jerry. um, I do the grocery shopping most of the time, for my family too, and my brain is still wired into the prices of four or five years ago. I still see these prices. I said, oh my gosh, I can't believe how much oranges cost. or peaches, or the one that I've written about which got some attention, frozen lasagna, which I served yesterday. as a matter of fact, my wife is traveling, so the kids and I had frozen lasagna. um, we cannot bring prices back down across the whole economy. to bring prices back down across the whole economy, we would basically need to have an economy that's shrinking, and nobody wants an economy that shrinking. what we can do, and what we are on on process of doing, is stop prices from climbing quickly from here. so we're on our way back. inflation is running right now, depending on how you measure it, kind of in the mid, mid to high twos on an annual rate. uh, and we need to get it all the way back down to 2%. but we we're making good progress. over the last years it's come way down, but mid to high tws is still climbing, it's not going back to what it was in 2019 and that's a. that's just a fundamental disconnect, so that when I say, hey, we're making good progress on inflation, you might look at me and say, what are you talking about, Buddy? and we're both right, uh, because I'm talking about the change going forward and most people are saying, yeah, but I remember what prices were like five years ago and they're not even close. and you're right, yeah. as a former social studies teacher and economics teacher, um, my question to you, given the influence that the Federal Reserve Bank has on the monetary system, forecast for me if you would, or compare and contrast how this presidential election outcome will influence what you do? nice, try, uh, as I. as I said when we started, we take whatever policies are enacted by the Congress and signed into law by the president as an input into our analysis of the economy and whether it's tariffs or its taxes or its spending. all of that just goes into our analysis of what do we think, where do we think the US economy is headed? what does it mean for inflation? what does it mean for maximum employment? and I'll give you, this is not about the election. I'll give you a specific example of how recent Dynamics have complicated our analysis of the economy. normally, prior to the pandemic, we thought that the US economy needed to create about 100,000 jobs a month to keep up to keep up with population growth. so every month there's a job report that comes out, gets a lot of attention, and we said, well, if it's more than 100,000, that means the labor market is getting tighter because you're not simply absorbing the new entrance, you're actually drawing from the margins. well, over the last couple years, we have seen a big increase in Immigration. uh, by some estimates, maybe a million more, maybe two, maybe three million more people than had been traditionally expected. based on the trends, that complicated our analysis of, well, what's the break even rate of job growth that's needed to not overheat the economy and not have the economy, uh, cool down too much. and so I mentioned the Congressional budget office. they did very important work trying to estimate what these inflation or these immigration Dynamics are, and then we use their analysis as an input to our models to figure out what do we think this means for inflation going forward. so that's an example. uh, if immigration policy going forward looks different, then that'll affect our reading of the labor market and we'll just take it as it as it is. Neil, I got one over here back at me again. uh, you mentioned about, you alluded to tariffs and through the last 20, 25 years we've had this great ability to take um purchasing from throughout the world, the lowest prices. you know, dollars were going and and people were being manufactured in the low area and through free trade or or low tariff trade, we all benefited from that tremendously. now that a lot of that's being onshore, now where there's concern that, uh, certain areas were putting tariffs on for the EVS coming into the country and and kind of reversing that those big trends, does that make your job more difficult? forecasting inflation, you know we think that, um, a tariff at at a rough level, we think that a tariff leads to a one-time change in the price level. so if you were buying, if we were buying, a good from China, some widget, and now there's a 10% tariff put on it, we think that the, of course, Americans are going to pay 10% more, but that shouldn't by itself lead to ongoing sustained High inflation going forward in the future. it's probably just a onetime change in the price level that we think we ought to be able to analyze fairly, in a very straightforward manner, what. what becomes difficult is if we do some tariffs and then China retaliates, and then Europe retaliates six months later and then we come back and do more. then that becomes kind of a VT, a vicious cycle that not only leads to higher costs but it makes it. our job is a lot more challenging in analyzing what do those dynamics mean. but at a at a basic level, a one-time tariff should just be a one-time change in the price level. again, though for those of those of you and me paying that, we're not going to be happy about that, but from an inflation perspective it shouldn't change the dynamic very much, Neil. so why half a percent and not a quarter percent? and then, also because we're amongst friends, what's coming? um, why half a percent in terms of our interest rate cut and not a quarter percent? at our last meeting, the Judgment ultimately was: I think either of those would have been appropriate. uh, there was many signs that the labor market was slowing, so the unemployment rate got down to around three and a half% and it then ticked up to around 4.2 or so percent. historically, when the unemployment rate has gone up by that much. in America. it is pread to recession, says, Hey, recession's around the corner and the unemployment rate would take off from there. we definitely want to avoid that, and so we saw a lot of signs that the labor market was weakening, and so we said: you know what? we have made a lot of progress on inflation. let's dial back our interest rates a little bit now. even after the 50 basis point cut, I still think monetary policy is still putting our feet on the breaks of the economy. we're not yet back to what we consider to be neutral, and so moving 50 basis points just moved us further along back towards neutral. uh, but we're not at neutral yet. so I think some folks argued for 25, some argued for 50. I think either of those or both of those were reasonable. we decided to go 50 going forward. we're going to look at all the data. we're going to look at the GDP data, the inflation data, the labor market data. you know, one surprise over the past couple years for me has been how resilient the US economy has been. you know we've raised rates a lot and the US economy has basically absorbed them and still continued to perform quite well and the labor market has remained strong. that's really good news, but it's a little bit hard to figure. that makes me wonder. maybe that neutral rate that balances everything out is higher than it was before the pandemic. we're just not sure. so you guys have a great opportunity to ask- or grill Neil, maybe- comments, questions. I know you guys are all shy. you have, you have some. well, never mind. I was just going to ask if the strength we've seen in the labor market and in the US economy has resulted in maybe that neutral rate of interest moving higher. that was going to be. my question is where you might think that might be. and then, maybe in addition to that, what would it take for you to see in the labor market? we had a good print last month, but prior to that we've been trending weaker. what would it take for you to say, hey, let's, we're going to revise our dots and maybe signal a quicker pace of easing, uh, as we move into 25, so the let's go spend a minute or two more on the neutral rate. so there's this concept that we thought, think about a lot, which is: what's the interest rate that balances out the economy? it's neither accelerating the economy nor is it restraining the economy? we don't know it for sure. we can only try to estimate it and we think before the pandemic it was very low. so you remember, before the pandemic we had low rates for a year, on year, on year, and yet we weren't seeing High inflation. the question is, are we going back to that economy with low rates or are we structurally going to be somewhere higher? we're not sure. now, what sets the neutral rate? we think it's dominated by two factors, one of which are demographics. as our society ages, people are saving more money. you think about another way this neutral rate comes about. you have some people are saving money and then you have people who are investing money. how do you balance savings and investment? an interest rate balances those out. so if your savings more because the e, the society is getting older, that would drive the neutral rate down. the other factor is productivity growth. if you're in a high productivity economy, massive demand for investment Capital- that would drive the neutral rate up. well, where's productivity going? I think I I've got some confidence that demographics are going to continue what they're doing, but maybe things like Ai and new technologies are going to increase the demand for capital, investment Capital going forward and that would push the neutral rate up. I don't know. I think for me it's way too soon to know if AI is going to manifest in a different productivity environment and therefore a higher neutral rate environment. so I think it's too soon to tell. but the fact that the economy has been so resilient over the last couple years tells me, at least right now, the neutral rate seems to be higher. but is it going to settle where it is now or is it going to go back to something like it was before? you know, time will, time will tell. what was the second part of your question? what would it take, oh to yeah to move. for me to move quicker on the dots, um, would be if we saw a weakening, like real evidence that the labor market is weakening quickly, then that would tell me as one policymaker: hey, maybe we ought to bring back, bring down our interest rate more quickly than I currently expect. right now I forecasting some more, uh, modest Cuts over the next several quarters to get to something around neutral. but it's going to be depend on the data and obviously you know we want to keep the labor market strong and we want to get inflation back down to our 2% Target. we're on track to do that, but if the labor market weakened surprisingly, then that would cause me to take a fresh look at my dots. I've got a question over here, Neil. So, Neil, well, there I am. so, Neil in. uh, in regards to Energy prices, uh, as of this moment, crude Brent crude is at 74- 74.4 four. um you sure I keep an eye on that a little bit in my business. so I'm just curious again, since you don't set uh OPEC prices or any policy with regards to Energy prices, just with your view of the landscape globally. obviously, we have the conflict between uh Israel and and Hamas going on, which is involving Iran. there's a lot of tension there. I would have expected oil prices to be much higher. actually, usually they they go up on rumor and come down on facts. what are you seeing, what in your crystal ball view? what do you see going forward, barring any extraordinary event in the Middle East? well, I too am surprised that there has not been more of a an effect of these geopolitical conflicts on the price of oil. as I mentioned earlier, when Russia invaded Ukraine, it sent commodity markets through the roof. why didn't that happen when Hamas attacked Israel and then Israel defended it itself and then Iran got involved, Etc. I don't know um. I'm happy that it hasn't and I'm hoping that that situation can find a a a resolution fairly quickly for their own sake, the people who live there, but also for the global economy sake. I I've heard some people speculate. you know that the US continues to, continues to drill, continues to tap new fracking wells in North Dakota and in Texas and other parts of the country. that that new Supply continues to make the world more resilient against oil price shocks, certainly makes our domestic economy more resilient. you know, when Russia invaded Ukraine, Europe was deeply, deeply exposed because they're buying so much Russian gas. there were huge concerns that not only European economy but European consumers- winter was coming, Etc would really suffer because of that. the global economy has managed to respond to meet their energy needs, which is remarkable, and so you know I don't have a crystal ball in terms of where these geopolitical events are going going, but I do think all of the actions of the western economies to tap their own resources. I think, on the margin that t Bay big um controversy lately about the independence of the Central Bank. Could you um um let us know how important in my opinion, that the Central Bank stays independent. you know, in the 70s it wasn't quite as much independent, but it has been for the last 40 or 50 years. so i' like to hear your comments on the independence of the Central Bank. yeah, one of the things that's been a lesson now that's been learned in economies all around the world is keeping Monet, monetary policy, these decisions about interest rates and inflation and the labor market. keeping it independent of day-to-day politics is the right answer for the economies. just as Jerry said, in the 1970s the FED fell down on its job. under pressure from politicians, the FED did not raise interest rates, even though inflation was really high. uh, because politicians didn't want there to be Economic Consequences of those High interest rates. and then what ended up happening is inflation went higher and then you had stagflation. and then it wasn't until 1979 when President Carter appointed Paul vuler as Fed chair, who came in and raised rates dramatically to break the back of inflation. by the way, he caused a deep recession in doing so. but then president rean from the other party reappointed him, effectively endorsing vr's approach, and then that started a pattern where presidents many times have appointed the Fed chair that was appointed by their predecessor across party lines, and at this point most leaders of both of our major political parties uh really appreciate and uh respect the independence of the FED, realize why it's important. it goes back to this notion I talked about earlier: keeping long-term inflation expectations anchored. you know, back in the 1970s, if you look at Labor agreements, so a union and employers would negotiate for multi-year agreements. those agreements almost all had cost of living adjustments in there, because inflation was top of mind for every employee and for every business. that was the thing they were most concerned about: making sure that they were kept up with inflation. if you look at most labor agreements following the 1995 or later 2000s cost of living adjustments, we not in there because we all understood we've got inflation under control and we're not going to let it flare back up again. so then workers and their employers could negotiate over other things that were more important. well, we want to get inflation back down to our 2% Target so that you and I and your neighbors and your family and your friends are not thinking about it and you can get back to focusing on things that really matter that you should be thinking about. and so that's our job: to get it back down. but keeping monetary policy independent is a key, maybe the most important element of being able to achieve that, so that all of us don't have to think about it in the future. know, one of the um got a question. great, thank you for pausing, Jerry. um, so I? I have a question on unemployment. um, we've talked a little bit about how resilient the US economy has been in the past couple of years, um, but there has been weakness, notably in the tech sector. uh, how, how does that sort of thing factor into your analysis and and decisions sort of the potential weakness in different areas of the US economy? you know, we pay attention to it, um, but we have, we have to operate, set a monetary policy that we think is right for the US economy as a whole. we aren't able to Target the tech sector or housing or Health Care per se, and one thing that our region of the economy benefits from is our region of the economy, generally speaking, is pretty diverse. most major sectors of the US economy are represented here, so if one sector is down, there's a good chance other sectors are up and that makes our region somewhat resilient to some of these economic Cycles. uh, so, yes, we pay attention to it. I've seen the headlines, just that you're referring to, of some layoffs in the tech sector, but I also hear anecdotes. I heard one earlier today. there were some layoffs. it made Tech workers easier to find for other businesses and so you know they're, generally speaking, getting absorbed. you know the one of the big pleasant surprises for me: of all the sectors of the US economy, housing is traditionally the most sensitive to our interest rate increases. it's been remarkable to me that as interest rates have gone up and as mortgage rates got as high as eight, employment in the construction sector never fell. it continued climbing and I think what happened is they went from building single family homes to building multif family and now they're transitioning to other types of construction projects. but it's been remarkable how resilient just the construction sector has been, which traditionally would have been very sensitive to interest rate increases. Neil, under your leadership, uh, the FED of Minneapolis has been leader in the nation on social issues and uh? um, Equity issues. what are your? can you give the group what you're feeling on, especially inflation? we heard in our a little round table beforehand, uh, how inflation was not Equitable. u meaning, uh, the lower income people are really um, um suffering. not all of us are suffering from it, but the lower income, uh, just proportionately suffering from it. can you give us some of your thoughts on that? I think no, that's exactly right. so, one of the things Jerry is mentioning: in 2017, we launched a research center at the Minneapolis fed called the opportunity and inclusive growth Institute. the idea is we have got a- a small army, not an army- A small, a good team of brilliant PhD economists who do really cutting edge research on the US economy and the global economy. but we said, boy, there are these huge economic disparities in our country. could we focus some of that research horsepower to understand those disparities? even if we can address it with monetary policy, if we could do dispassionate research and highlight them, then maybe that might be useful for other policy makers, and so our team is doing a great job on those areas. in terms of inflation, you're absolutely right. inflation is definitely hitting the lowest income Americans the most, the folks who spend the biggest percentage of their income on food and energy, just making ends meat. those are the areas where prices have gone up the most and they have the least extra income to try to cover those costs, and so it's a real challenge. the good news is we have seen in the last few years some of the highest wage gains go for some of the lowest wage employees, so it's helping them to catch up, uh, which is good news. they're long overdue for a raise. but it's been real Challenge and our board members are sources of information. we have several uh labor Representatives. I see Chelsea here, Al here, who has represented organized labor. they give us Windows into what's happening with Rank and fly employees, everything from grocery store workers to, uh, you know, more highly paid, high-skilled workers that are also unionized. what are they experiencing? we also do roundtables with workers just to say, hey, how are you making ends meet? you know, how are you navig this? what are you doing to get through this? uh, it's been, um, it's been Illuminating and they've been very candid with some of the challenges that they're facing. Neil, So when you're meeting with your board- right, you have board members, but then also one you had shared that you meet with other Federal Reserve presidents like yourself. what are those conversations like? what are they? what are you talking about? what are you hearing from them? we know what it's like here in the chiple valley, but are these things that we're talking about today um consistent Across the Nation. well, there's two kinds of gatherings. let me just clarify. one is when we all get together for our Federal Open Market Committee meetings and that's when each of the presidents is, in part, talking about what's happening in their region and the country. so, for example, um my friend Rafael bosk is president of the Atlanta fed, which includes the Southeastern portion of the United States. they get a lot of hurricanes and when natural disasters come through, one of the things I can count on Rafael sharing is what's happening in their region in terms of these disasters that are hitting. what's happening to the economy, what's happening to workers, what's happening to businesses, how long is it going to take? same thing: you've also seen major national uh n natural disasters hit Texas. the Dallas fed president often talks about what's happening if a hurricane or a major flood comes through, for example in hits Houston. so some of what they're doing is talking about the global, the national economy that we all see somewhat. similarly, some of them there, Regional events that hit very, very hard locally. that that it's helpful for us to know about um separately. you and I had mentioned the 12 Reserve Bank presidents get together, probably three times a year, to talk about various, mostly administrative- issues. that happens across the Federal Reserve. so there's a bunch of stuff that we do together. I'll give you an example. it doesn't make sense for us to have 12 different it systems for the 12 different Reserve Banks. so we've had one centrally Managed IT system that we all utilize so that we don't duplicate resources. that would be wasteful. but we have to make some decisions about some of this back office and infrastructure that we have, or we have. all 12 Reserve Banks manage cash. so what that means is, if you go to your bank, you go to your ATM and you take cash out of your ATM, the cash from your ATM would have started out at a Federal Reserve Vault. well, we manage cash to meet the needs of our banking sector all the way across the country. we do that in a coordinated manner. so there's a bunch of things like that that we do with each other on behalf of the country as a whole, that we meet to try to wrestle with. hey, these issues have emerged, how do we tackle them together? that's not as um exciting, so to speak, as monetary policy, but nonetheless it's really important. there was a question over here. so it seems like um, savings is kind of like at a alltime l low and credit card spending is like at an all-time high. does that factor into a possibility that people, even though the economy is strong, like overspending which could lead to a regression because of them overspending in a sense? yeah, thank you. um, you're right, we do look a lot of the savings rate. the savings rate was higher before the pandemic and then it was very low during the pandemic and there was the notion of there was a lot of stimulus that was put out in the economy. a lot of people got checked- checks even if you weren't receiving checks, if you weren't able to spend. generally, people's savings went way up because they couldn't go on airplanes, they couldn't go to Taylor Swift concerts, Etc. so they're spending one way up. so we monitored this thing called excess savings- how much extra savings do people have relative to normal- and we looked for signs that that was being spent down. it seems like by many measures, that has now been largely spent down, and so when would the savings rate go back up now? here again, the data is fuzzy. we're getting mixed signals. there were recent revisions to some of those data that suggested that actually the savings rate is not as low as it looked and that maybe it is more sustainable now that average savings rate masks differences across people. so we do know that there are delinquencies for lower credit score borrowers. those are climbing. so if you're a subprime, you have a subprime credit card. those delinquencies are climbing higher than they were before the pandemic. on average, US households and US consumers seem like they're doing fine, but I do think that there are Pockets that are feeling real stress. back to the people that Jerry talked about, which is lower income workers, who got hit the hardest because of inflation: uh, have probably paid down, spent down their excess pandemic savings and are now leaning more heavily on their credit cards, and I think that that's true. we've got a question over here, Danel. uh, thanks for coming. uh, my question is more about the broader picture in the economy. if you look back over the last few years, I think what we would say are pretty realistic and reliable indicators of economic hardships, um, kind of predicting recessions, whether it's an inverted yield curve or a shocked commodity prices or 9% inflation or geopolitical things that popped up. I think people in the investment world, like Jamie Diamond and other people, have said. you know you look at those things and typically that you would. you would see a recession from that and I think that was the expectation for a lot of people and it hasn't happened. you know we keep using the words either soft Landing, no Landing or hard landing, and I think most people being included in wealth management pleasantly surprised how strong the economy has gotten through, how well the consumer has done. looking back as a case study, what would you attribute that to, when so many historically reliable indicators were all flashing red lights and then that never, at least to this point, has come to fruition? uh, you're great question. um, I wrestle with this every day. I I think it's too soon to know. it's possible that one, one theory that I have is that, at least in the short run, because of the reopening Dynamics, the neutral rate has gone higher and that we thought we were putting two feet on the brakes but we were actually only putting one foot on the brakes, and that the disinflation that we've seen has mostly been those Supply factors resolving on their own. that monetary policy's great role in this disinflation was keeping inflation expectations anchored, which is really important, but it wasn't bringing demand down to bring inflation down that if I had to pick an answer right now, that would be my most likely answer of that. but how long is this High neutral rate environment going to be sustained? I don't know. I think this question that you asked is going to be studied for years to come. uh- and you know we don't know yet people, you know it's a, it's a high class problem that we've got inflation coming back down and the labor market staying strong. I'm very happy about it. we want to keep it going and that's why we started dialing back our interest rate increases to make sure that we can try to to improve our chances for trying to achieve that. but it's a great question, Neil. uh, at one time, before I got on the board, I don't know, maybe I- I don't think I change you- you were a, I'm a duve and now you're considered a hawk. do you think that humorous? um, what um people um indicate you are? uh, have you really changed or it's just you're going with the facts? I mean, I just think I'm going with the facts. but so prior to the pandemic, we had inflation at around 1.5 or 1.6%, which is a little bit below 2%, and we kept thinking we're at maximum employment and more workers got jobs and inflation didn't take off. so I look at those factors and I say: why are we raising rates? why are we trying to tap the brakes on the economy? let it go. so that's why I was- quote, unquote- a dove. then, of course, we had very high inflation. it's like very clear: oh my gosh, we got to get inflation back down. we got to raise rates and we need to do what we need to do to get inflation back down. so then people said: you're a hawk. I mean, I think the labels are a little bit, they're convenient, but they're too simple. and if I was always do, always doish, or I was always hawkish, no matter what was happening in the economy, that wouldn't make very much sense, would it? and so what you'll see on the committee is people change their position as the facts of the economy change and as their understanding of the Dynamics of the economy change, and that's what should happen. I'm not saying I got it right then or now, but I am trying to respond to the reality that we're all witnessing. so we have time for two or three questions or comments. what do you want Neil and his board of directors- Jerry being one of them to take away from the chiple valley today. good, bad optimistic in the middle. you know I want give a talk after the pandemic, no, after the financial crisis. before I was at the fed and because I was a, I ran the tarp during the financial crisis at Treasury and the first person who SP stood up said: I don't have a question, I just want to thank you for your service. you guys did you know heroic effort to stabilize the economy. I said: thank you very much. the next person raised his hand, said: I don't have a question, I haven't got a comment. I totally disagree with you, that guy. you guys were bums, Etc. I said: well, I appreciate your uh, your honesty. that's true story, that actually happened. so if you want to voice your objection, um, now's Your Chance. by the way, I should have told you this at the start. we're live streaming this so you could voice your objection to the world. we did a round table of small businesses uh, before we uh met with all of you before lunch and my overall takeaway: everybody had various concerns, but my overall takeaway that I shared with them was that things sound overall like they're going pretty well. you know it's not great, could be better, but overall things sound like they're going pretty well and uh, which is good. I'm happy to hear that. yeah, thanks, uh, for your commentary today. uh, I'm going to bring a comment from my wife, who works in uh U, the non for-profit organizations, and one of the things that she struggles with as an employment counselor is getting folks off of the sideline of unemployment into the workforce because of child care, and one of the things that she would point out is is that, unlike most of the social programs that help those who are disadvantaged, child care is not a sliding scale. so you either don't have employment and you get help with child care, or you have employment and you, you, you are out of the workforce. and so I I'd like to just push a little bit, for, as we look to expand that uh, the workforce that some of what you may have seen about full employment may have been, we finally got wages up to the point where people could afford to get back into the workforce and, because Child Care was, hadn't increased as much with, uh, the cost of everything else. and, secondarily, I would also push that there are a lot of people sitting on the sideline of employment because of lack of transportation, and so, as we think about some of the ebikes and other things that are out there for transportation, maybe there's some opportunities to get people, uh, back into the workforce by investing in some of those Technologies, uh, as part of the social programs. yeah, thanks for your coming. you know, Child Care, um, comes up a lot. housing comes up a ton everywhere. Child Care does too. it's, uh, it's immediate for me because I have two young children. my wife and I have a five and a half year old daughter who's in kindergarten this year, and almost four-year-old son, who's still in daycare. uh, and it's, you know, we're fortunate that we can afford it, but it's very expensive even for us, and it's a, it's a, it's a very curious thing, because it's so expensive for families and yet wages for childcare workers are so low, and you know, you say, well, we want childcare workers to get paid more, yes, and then it becomes even more unaffordable for families, and so it's a very, very, very challenging public policy problem to try to achieve both of those two things at the same time. and so, you're right, it is a barrier for folks. uh, you know, because you face a question, you does one of us stay home. if, by the way, for my wife and I, you know, basically, when both of our kids were in daycare, 100% of my wife's after tax income paid for child care. so we were economically indifferent. but it's good for her and good for our family that our kids are in daycare and that she's working. but it's a heck of an economic question, um, uh, for families to face, and we're both Highly Educated, you know, have really good jobs. so if that's what we're facing, what are people who are not as fortunate as us facing? and so it's a, it's a big factor. well, it's 1:30 um, I think, Neil, and um rest of my board members, all the way from Montana, one of them uh, to come here, um to the chipa valley to hear you and to hear um what's going on in chipa. thank you, Neil. thank you very much, really appreciate it. thanks, Jerry.