https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-participates-in-fireside-chat-at-torcuato-di-tella-university-argentina

Neel Kashkari participates in fireside chat at Torcuato di Tella University, Argentina

October 14, 2024

Argentina

Neel Kashkari

good afternoon everybody. uh, why don't we start? first of all, I want to thank for having invited president Neil Kashkari, so it's a pleasure to have you here. I thank Juan Pablo for inviting me to chair. it's too much to chair this session, so, er, this talk will end at 7 pm sharp. okay, uh, because we have other activities. so president Neil Kashkari has been president of the federal Bank of Minneapolis, one of the fed's 12 Regional Banks. since 2016, Neil serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets the Nations the US monetary policy. Neil earned his bachelor's and master degrees in mechanical engineering from the University of Illinois and his MBA from the University of Pennsylvania won school and Neil began his career as an aerospace engineer, developing technology for NASA space missions. he later held a variety of roles in public service and finance, most notably an assistant as assistant Secretary of the Treasury during the 2008 financial crisis, where he oversaw the trouble asset relief program, the tarp. so we welcome you, uh, here at univers you, so thank you. it's great to be here. I really appreciate the invitation. this is my first visit to Argentina. it's a great honor for me to be here and thank you to so many students here tonight. what a great turnout. I really appreciate it. um, I'm going to speak just for a few minutes and then we're going to have a discussion and then I hope we're going to have questions from all of you. uh, one thing I just want you to know is: I think we're live streaming this to the public. uh, in the spirit of transparency, I I like to live stream my big uh speeches and talks such as this. so, uh, when we, when we get to Q&A- I think there's- is there GNA be a microphone somewhere? yes, please speak into the microphone, just so that people on online can hear you ask your question. um, so the Minneapolis fed. I've got- I think I have- some slides that I can run through fairly quickly. the Minneapolis fed is one of 12 federal reserve banks in the United States. so in the American history, uh, there were a few attempts to establish a Central Bank in the US. they each lasted about 20 years and then the government got rid of them. and then in the late uh 1800s, the US economy was hit by a lot of financial crises and panics and depressions, and then there was a really big one, the Panic of 1907, and then, finally, the US government said, hey, we need to have a central bank to try to manage through these crises. and so then they passed the Federal Reserve Act. they they created the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and what they did was a little bit unique. they didn't want all of the central banks to Simply Be housed in the nation's capital, they wanted to spread it out around the country. so they created something called The Board of Governors, which is in Washington DC. here it is. and then they created 12 different IND independent federal reserve banks spread out around the country, where we're supposed to be representing our regions in the monetary policy process. so I'll show you this quick chart for a second, so historical background: US Constitution ratified in 1788. President Lincoln- Abraham Lincoln- created the first national currency. in 1861, banking panics hit. we didn't have a central bank yet. Federal Reserve created in 1913. but then it wasn't until 1979 that the Modern Way the Federal Reserve operates as a independ monetary policy was established. my my point of showing this history is: sometime. these things take a long time to work out. like you, you start something doesn't work quite right, you take a step back and then crisis hits and then you start something again. so it took a long time for the us to get to where it is in our type of modern monetary U monetary policy that we have today. so this is just a chart of the United States. the different color shows the different regions of the United States. the part that I present is the Minneapolis fed up at the top. the yellow, uh, our jobs. my colleagues are here. Wampa, we're very blessed as part of our research Department. he's also your professor, uh, we're happy to share him with you, but we want him to come back to Minneapolis, uh, and Andrea rafo is our research director. what they helped me do is both understand what's happening in our regional economy, what's happening in the National economy and what's happening in the global economy as we decide what monetary policy to set for the United States. so at the Federal Reserve, we have two goals that the US Congress has assigned us. one is stable prices- that we've defined as 2% inflation, and one is maximum employment, as many people as possible employed, contributing to our economy, who want to be employed, and and then, of course, monetary Independence, as I talked about, is really critical to us ultimately being successful. now, if you look at the history here in the 1960s- that's the leftand side of the chart, the red line is inflation. the US enjoyed a period of pretty low unemployment and low inflation in the 1960s and then in the 1970s, there were a bunch of oil shocks coming out of the Middle East and oil prices skyrocketed all around the world and that led to- uh, very high unemployment and very high inflation at the same time- what we call stagflation. but in response to that, the Federal Reserve did not raise rates as aggressively as it should have, under political pressure from leaders in Washington who said: no, the economy is suffering enough, don't do any more with monetary policy. that was a mistake. it led to what we call the UN anchoring of inflation expectations, where people started to be convinced that we have high inflation now, we're going to have high inflation next year, we're going to have high inflation the year after that. and if people embed that, believe that and embed that in their thinking, it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. because if you have a job and you think that prices are going to keep going up, you're, you're going to go to your employer and say: I need a raise just to keep up with high prices next year. and then your employer is going to say, okay, fine, I want to keep you as an employee, so I'm going to pay you more, but now I'm going to charge our customers more to pay for this and then it ends up being a vicious spiral that just continues, and continues, and continues. so that started to happen in the 1970s in the US and then a new Federal Reserve chairman, Paul vulker, was appointed in 1979 and he said: no, the Federal Reserve needs to act aggressively to break this cycle of inflation. and he raise rates aggressively, causing a very deep recession. unemployment went up, but that pain was necessary to bring inflation down. so if we look ahead, you can see here on the left hand side, the green line. the bluish green line is our policy rate went up very high, leading to a big recession. that's the Shaded area. but on the right you can see that unemployment then fell and inflation fell. his monetary policy was ultimately effective in Breaking that ious cycle of high inflation. so if we look ahead, up until the pandemic, following that painful episode, the US enjoyed very n very good economic, very good economy. you can see here this is inflation. inflation basically Trends down at around a 2% level. it Trends down to 2% in the 1990s, stays there in the mid 2000s. you have the financial crisis of ' 08. it stays at low infl and so, basically, the monetary policy Independence was foundational and set up 30 or 40 Years of a good economy that followed it. but it was a tough transition but once adopted, it was very, uh, it was a very powerful benefit for the country. then, of course, what ended up happening? covid hit the economy, was shut down the Federal Reserve and the government did a lot to support the economy. but then, of course, as Co ended, we were surprised by very high inflation. so what ended up causing the high inflation? we had Supply chains around the world that were messed up. so if you bought some good, maybe it's a washing machine that was made abroad. if the supply chains for that washing machine, if the parts were not available for that washing machine, then you couldn't buy it in Argentina and we couldn't buy it in the United States. it was a global, global Supply shock. there's also disproportionate demand for goods. so every year, every day, consumers will spend so much on services and so much on Goods. well, when the services sector shut because of covid- so you weren't going to restaurants, you weren't getting on airplanes, you weren't going to the barber shop, people stayed home and then they just spent money on Goods. so the goods sector was overwhelmed at the same time that the good sector was facing those Supply disruptions. so that was very inflationary. we also had workers who left the labor market and were afraid to come back in because of covid. we had a lot of stimulus and then finally we had the major shock of Russia invading in Ukraine, which sent oil prices and commodity prices through the roof, not just for Europe, all around the world. these are Global markets and we all experien a high inflation from that. so if you look here in response, if you look on the right hand side, the Blue Line- This is what the policy rate is. in face of high inflation, we raised our policy rate very, very aggressively to try to bring inflation down and you can see the red line on the left. inflation then fell quite quickly. but the pleasant surprise is unemployment has stayed low. historically, when the Federal Reserve has raised rates aggressively, it has typically led to a recession and led to a big increase in unemployment. that didn't happen this time. why didn't that happen? I think that didn't happen because most of the uh reduction in inflation actually didn't come because of our policy rate. it came because those Supply disruptions got better, Supply chains got fixed, you could buy the goods that you wanted, the services economy reopened so people could balance out their spending again. the covid waves ended, it went back in the background. workers came back in to the workforce and the war in Russia- Ukraine- hasn't Amplified. the commodity markets have really settled down, so a lot of the supply factors got better. and so the federal, the federal fund rate, our policy rate. it was important, but I would say it was not the most important factor in bringing that inflation down. and then the last thing I'm going to say- I guess I have two more charts. a word on inflation expectations. you're going to hear monetary policy makers and monetary economists talk a lot about this. how important it is. the the red line is what? the actual inflation in the United States that I showed you a moment ago. the blue line is a market measure of longrun inflation expectations. so what do Financial Market participants think? inflation is going to be between five years from now and 10 years from now and, what's remarkable, it barely moved. so this huge episode of high inflation. and American investors and investors around the world to invest in American Security said we trust that the Federal Reserve is going to keep inflation in check and that trust ultimately comes from the political support that the Federal Reserve enjoys from both of our major political parties, who have said, I mean, it's not unanimous support, but there's a lot of support amongst a lot, a lot of the leaders who said we need to keep monetary policy independent so that we can bring inflation down, keep it down and not get, have politics be involved in that. and this is the best chart I can think of that demonstrates what that Independence and what that credibility looks like. so, final thing, some key lessons that might be relevant here. um, low and stable inflation is a precondition for economic Prosperity. you got to conquer inflation and you have to keep it conquered now. achieving low inflation might require short-term economic pain. it did in the US. I know you're going going through a, a, a profound fisc, fiscal adjustment right now and finally, longterm, whatever structures you design and put in place, it's easy for me to it's easy for me to say this- I know it's hard to do in practice- to the extent possible, these institutional structures should be designed to endure over many economic cycles and over many political Cycles. so one of the things that happened- and I'm going to- I'm going to end now- is when President Carter, a Democrat, appointed Paul vulker to be chair. President Carter was then defeated in his re-election by President Reagan, a republican. President Reagan reappointed vulker and that started a pattern that's been followed many times by the Federal Reserve chair being reappointed by a future president who might be of a different political party, and that has been a nice demonstration of political support for having an independent Central Bank and independent monetary policy. anyway, I hope that overview was helpful. just to get us started- I'm excited about it discussion. okay, thank you very much. okay, thank you, Neil. I I have uh, two question, uh, one issue that you didn't address. you oversaw the, the tarp, the troubl asset relief program, which, I think, when you were in a team with Ben beran, I know, and everybody, as an economic historian, we we believe that Ben and the team saved what we said capitalism in some sense. no, because of doing this so. but then you affected, uh, a sharp Financial regulation, in particular with Shadow banking, which was one of the causes of this. what, what, what is if? if this financial regulation is still in place, what it will mean, because we are overseeing right now again like a Mini Boom in real State prices? no, so do you think that this famous crisis of 2008 in some sense, uh, we can evate? I mean this type of Crisis? so first, what is your experience? I think was a lot of stress there with the tarup, okay, and how fast was this financial regulation with the shadow Banking? and whether now, because we still have the primes and subprimes again, the know mean going back in some sense? so do we have the safeguards in order to, I mean to evitat again some kind of bubble in real estate? these two part of that question? it's a big question. um, the 08 crisis. I was at treasury 15 years ago. it felt like we were in economic War. I mean, nobody was shooting at us, thankfully, but every day the question was: can we get the economy through one more day? is there going to be widespread banking failure across the US economy? and ultimately, all the elements of government worked together- I was at treasury, which is the finance ministry, effectively, and we worked very closely with the Federal Reserve, the central bank and with the Congress, ultimately in giving us authority to inject capital in the banking system to stabilize the financial system. in '08, the US Financial system, in my opinion, was effectively insolvent, which meant the losses that they bore from the mortgages that they had exceeded their capital. it wasn't was didn't mean that every Bank was insolvent, but on whole they were insolvent. and so what do you do? in that moment, the only balance sheet strong enough to Bear those losses is the taxpayer, is the government balance sheet. so all of our operations were complicated, but it was a way of taking the risk out of the private sector and putting it on the balance sheet of the federal government, because only the federal government had was strong enough to with withstand it. um, now, could it happen again? after ' 08, the Congress passed some Financial reforms, notably one called The Dodd Frank act that raised Capital require. I did a bunch of stuff, but it raised Capital requirements on the biggest banks. so the biggest banks today have a lot more Capital than they had before the financial crisis. my humble opinion is it didn't go far enough, but I will tell you: uh, I'm of a minority view in that, and there does not appear to be any political appetite in the United States to raise Capital requirements further. there's a proposal that's been floated at the Federal Reserve and some other Regulators to raise Capital requirements. there was a lot of push back publicly from many different constituents, and so now they're coming out with a more modest proposal and so, um, you know, I hope we can continue to take this forward, because I worry that another 08 crisis could always happen. uh, we do know a few things. so one of the sources of the US crisis was that many, many people were able to buy, get loans to buy a house with no money down, no document ation of income. you just would write: well, I could make up a salary and you can get a loan. that has largely stopped, so they have clamped down on some of those egregious lending practices, but there's still, you know, risks are always out there. you know one thing that I'm a little bit optimistic about. you might. I'm not sure how much of this is on your radar here. uh, in the US, there's a lot of focus on the private credit Arena, where, instead of banks making loans, it's private Equity companies and other type of- uh, off balance sheet vehicles that are making loans to businesses. and it's scary on some level because it's exploded to a trillion dollar Plus Market fairly quickly. but as, as I've examined it, you know, a bank in the US today, a big bank is levered roughly 10 to one, 10 times as much assets for their Equity. these private credit vehicles are typically levered one to one, so it's much less leverage. banks have overnight liquidity, meaning you can go tomorrow and withdraw your money from the bank. these private credit Vehicles generally have long-term liquidity. so on both fundamental Dimensions. so where do systemic risk come from? the intersection between leverage and maturity transformation? so on both those Dimensions, these private credit Vehicles look like it's. they're much lower risk than Banks. so while I I wish we had tighter regulation on the banks, I'm actually cautiously optimistic that some of these Market developments might actually lead to less risk, Le at least less systemic risk in the financial system. okay, thank you. so my. my last question before opening the is: we feel from from outside that there is a reversion in interest rate policy. now we have decided the, a fall basically in nominal interest rate on the Fed rate. how do you feel? what was the the rationale for for doing this? for cutting rates? for cutting rates after you know this big spike? well, we've made a lot of progress in bringing inflation down. okay, so 2% is our inflation Target, depending on your measure of of inflation. it went up to 7- 8 9% and it is now running- I would call it at around- by our primary measure. it's now running at around a two and a half percent run rate and a lot of evidence suggesting that it's going to continue to fall from here. so we've made a lot of progress in bringing inflation down and while the labor market has remained tight, it's not as tight as it was a year ago, so that we've seen some evidence of of Labor weakening and so if we could freeze things roughly where we are, we would say this is great. you know, inflation's almost back to Target, labor market is strong. what we want to avoid is inflation keeps going and then the unemployment rate takes off from here like it's not worth it at this point to take have the unemployment rate shoot up from here. so we cut interest rates by half a percentage point and we said we're going to monitor the data in terms of where we go from here. but even today I think that after cutting rates 50 basis points, I think we are likely still in somewhat of a contractionary monetary policy stand. so it's not as though we've taken our feet completely off the brakes. we've just relaxed the brakes a little bit and we'll see how we go. thank you, so I open the floor to questions questions. Lucas, I re enjoyed your speech. I Have a theoretical question, sorry, about the reaction function of the, of the Fed, hypothetical, not related to current events, okay, but um, imagine there's a presidential candidate that's expected to enact a tariff or you know, fiscal policy that's expansionary. should a fair Reserve like Tak to account expected future policy actions? or you would just read actual data of what has happened in terms of your, your decisions in in monetary policy? yeah, we- um- I I'll leave, even generalize it a little more- we look at whether it's trade policies or fiscal policies that are passed by the Congress and the president signs into the Law. whatever they are- tax increase, tax cut, spending increase, tariffs- all of those are inputs into our models. as we analyze the US economy, we want to analyze what do we think potential growth is for the US economy? potential output, how? where are we relative that potential? and is inflation going to go up or is inflation going to go down? is unemployment going to go up? we're going to go down. but trying to guess what an Administration is going to do or what Congress is going to do, I don't think we're better at that than anybody else, and so we pay very close attention. once they enact something, then we'll put that in our models and say, okay, this is what we think it means for monetary policy, but, um, we don't try to forecast what they're going to do. W Jones, yes, here, yes, and, by the way, I want to encourage the students to ask questions. I let me say I I give a lot of talks at universities in in the United States, so what are the two types of questions I most often get? one is career questions, like: you started out as an engineer, how'd you end up doing this, which is fair- and the second is about Bitcoin, and so you know, I just want to anything. anything's uh, fair game. I think I'll be following up with uh Lucas's question, so trying to understand how you look at risk management and and the potential for new crisis or unexpected crisis. uh, are you concerned about uh Chinese financial markets and Chinese real estate and the soundness of the Chinese Financial system and, if so, if something big happens there, what would be the transmission mechanisms? uh, you should pay attention to, yeah, we, when we pay attention very closely uh to economies all around the world, because you know we're us- is a very big economy, but what happens in the world affects us too, so definitely care and we pay a lot of attention to it. um, you know it's hard for me to read. China has, seems to me, managed to delay the Reckoning of their housing bubble for a surprisingly long time, and maybe they're going to be able to keep doing that. I just, you know, I just don't know. uh, I think long-term China whe how long the housing adjustment takes in China, I don't know. my guess is they can probably muddle their way through for a long time. structurally, I think, their economy is not remotely competitive with advanced economies around the world. you know, on one hand, China says that they want to be an innovation economy and compete with the best around the world. on the other hand, they're literally clamping down in their Innovation sectors for their political ends. so they're my perspective- they're shooting themselves in the foot if they want to actually be competitive globally, whether it's in AI or in any other uh, Innovation you want to think of, and so I don't know. I'm not. I'm not worried about China as a competitor to the US, but obviously China's economy is Major and if they go through some downturn. one risk is spillovers to the rest of the world. so what would the, what would the mechanism be? the mechanism would be fear. I mean, that's the first mechanism. if you see a major economy going through a brutal adjustment that can upend markets all around the world and then that gets transmitted everywhere, just like the Russia invading Ukraine set a spike, a shock, all the way around the world. um, so that's one issue. and then the second issue that I don't know enough about is: could that, could that lead to some geopolitical, uh, risk? you know, an economic risk leads to some geopolitical risk and, and I don't even know how to think about that, can I add to this: so you're meaning that you are not worried about the Jan or to become a competitive International currency? correct? not all, not at all. because they have attempted, you know this silk trade and in order to isolate transactions for by using the US dollar. so this is in existence. it's just a threat that that you, the F, they're not worried about. so, um, you, yeah, what? what? why is the US dollar the global Reserve currency? it's not because we want it to be the global Reserve currency. it's because investors around the world have the most confidence in the US economy. of all major economies, the US economy is the economy that investor around the world the most confidence in. so what are the major economies that could be competitors to the US? one, of course, is China. just by virtue of scale, yeah, but, as I just said, the actions that they're taking, in my view, are literally anti-competitive. yeah, okay, so I'm not that worried about China. the other, of course, is the Euro Zone, and you know Europe has a number of challenges. they're trying to get their fiscal integration policies sorted out. you know I'm I'm bullish on Europe long run, but for now, I think the US's competitive position is very, very strong. but you can't take it for granted, right? you know we have to do things domestically to maintain our competitiveness: keep educating our young people, continue to make sure we have worldclass universities, continue to make sure we have a strong Innovation sector. all of these things are vitally important. so can't take it for granted, but I feel quite good today about our relative position. thank you very much. is there any other? yeah, so my question is whether you're concerned about um- US national debt, both uh levels and trajectories- um, and whether you believe it will condition monetary pocy policy decisions in the future. well, long run, the US has a clear challenge here. so talk about things that we could, how we could screw it up. um, there's a? there's something called the Congressional budget office in the US, which is an, a nonpartisan group of economists who work for the US Congress, and they forecast out the debt. and if you look at the forecast of the debt, it just skyrockets over the next 30 Years, mostly driven by- uh- demographics, our society's aging. many of our entitlement programs are paid for by current workers paying for current retirees. as that ratio gets imbalanced, the debt just goes to the roof. that is clearly not sustainable, and so something has to be done, and that's going to be. our politicians are going to have to deide some combination of raising taxes, cutting benefits, raising the retirement age. there's a, there are a few policy levers you can play to balance that out. I don't know what they're going to choose to do, but something has to be done. so, on one hand, yes, I'm concerned that if they do nothing, this is unsustainable and that would probably lead to much higher interest rates well into the future. in the near term, I'm not particularly concerned because, uh, there's bu, ultimately fundamental confidence in the US economy, uh, in our near-term Outlook, in our medium-term Outlook, you know, US Government debt: uh, obviously, countries have gotten into trouble, uh, with less debt to GDP than the US has now. at the same time, you've got Japan as an outlier, which has twice as much debt to GDP and has low interest rates and no trouble financing themselves. and so is the us more like a country that got into trouble or more like Japan. you know, I don't know what we are. I know this can't go on forever and the challenge is: how do you motivate political support to make challenge, make the tough choices before it ends up being a problem? and so it's, it's a go ahead. well, there will be political pressure not to increase rates, for instance, given the the high, high dead ratio. I, I haven't seen any evidence of that. you know, when we raise the policy rate, uh, Five, Five Points, five. you know, 500 basis points, 550 basis points. you know we did what we needed to do, what we thought was the right thing to do, and there was a lot of political support to let us do use our best judgment. so, uh, I'm, I'm hopeful that there won't be other questions. yes, here, yeah, kind of following up on the last question I would like you to, I would like to hear your opinion about how policy H, monetary policy, could shift in the near future, since most Western countries and countries in Asia are facing really low nality rates, really low. what rates? fertility, yeah, you know. um, we think I mentioned earlier the neutral rate. so there's some interest rate that we believe exists that neither stimulates nor restrains economic activity and over time we think around the world that the neutral rate has been gradually declining like this. now we don't set this pattern, but we man, we move interest rates up and down around that neutral rate to try to balance out these economic Cycles. we think a driver of the neutral rate, one of the fundamental drivers, is the Aging of society, driven by low fertility rates and leading to more sa. you know, balancing savings and investment, you end up adding more savings as this continues down. so that would suggest that once we get through this period, that we're probably going to be in a low interest rate environment again in the future, the way we were before covid. but I don't know that for sure. that's what our models suggest, that that ought to be the case- will be in a low neutral rate environment. but is it the other? the other driver is productivity growth. so we've been in a period of fairly modest productivity growth the last 10 or 15 years. is that going to be true the next 10 or 15 years? I don't know. is it possible that AI will lead to some boost in productivity? I hope so. that would be great, but it's. these are very, very hard to forecast. so my gut tells me fertility will be pulling interest rates down, AG, or the low fertility rates pulling interest rates down, and, I'm hope, hoping that productivity goes up and it tugs interest rates in the other direction. and where those two balance out we'll have to see questions. hello, uh, considering how important Bitcoin has become in the last few years, how important what has Bitcoin, Bitcoin? okay, I would like to know if. do you think that? well, cryptocurrencies have a place in a regulated Financial system? so, um, I have come to develop quite strong views on this. uh, let me, let me, let's do a little experiment. let me see a show of hands. if any of you have used AI in the last month, like chat gbt, okay, almost every hand has gone up. okay, how many of you have bought something like a sandwich, a book anything using Bitcoin in the last month? no, I have not. this, this was just for demonstration purposes, okay, so here's so zero for the people watching online. that's a zero on bitcoin. so all the Bitcoin Bros who are watching this can be outraged by this. um, why did I say that? Bitcoin has been around for more than a dozen years and it's still useless. nobody, like the proponents, are trying to find some something that this thing is good for that you can't already do using regular payment methods, and it's zero, the only, the only real- in the US at least, the only actual utility of Bitcoin is to either as a tool of speculation, where you just going to bet on bitcoin, or to get around banking regulations. so in the US, if you're a drug dealer and the bank knows you're a drug dealer, they're not going to let you have a bank account. so you, as a drug dealer, you say, well, what do I do? use Bitcoin, and then you can inter, you can transact that way. or if you're an arms dealer. so there are a bunch of sectors of the economy that are illegal, that the banking sector will not touch. they are, they are using Bitcoin to facilitate their transactions. so in a, in a democracy with a rule of law where you have regular payment methods that are functioning. so far it's been a dozen years and there's nothing, as opposed to AI, which is two years and every one of your hands went up and every day you're reading about and I'm reading about people are coming up with new uses for AI, new things it can do, and so I'm really excited about the potential for AI. but after a dozen years, it's Bitcoin so far been utterly useless in the real world. you know, look, it's possible that they'll find some utility for it later, but so far they're batting zero, and so I'm quite skeptical. another question: almost yes, yes, hi, thank you. does the F consider the effects of the changes on rights for emerging markets like Argentina? you know we pay attention to it because we know there's a feedback loop. so we- you know we- we- move interest rates, we can, we can model what we think it'll do to the currency, and then what does that mean for those other economies? and then what does it mean for the US economy? so we definitely pay attention to it, but our mandate is very clear: that we have to set monetary policy to achieve 2% inflation and maximum employment in the US, um, and so I'll give you an example. I know, uh, there's a lot to talk of dollarization as a strategy for countries who are battling High inflation, and I see the appeal of it. one of the challenges is: can that country get enough dollars? first of all, it's not, that's not an easy thing to solve. and then the second thing is, even if you can get enough dollars, then you have to live with us monetary policy, which may not be appropriate for your economy. it's very easy to imagine a situation where the US is raising rates for our own domestic reasons and your local economy needs lower rates for your own domestic reasons, and then that can impose uh real hardship on your local e economy, and so we have to set monetary policy for the us. but obviously it has effects around the world. about dollarization, have you discussed this? I mean, in the sense you know whether you you feel you're sympathetic with this. I mean, you said that it is inconvenient for for us, but does it bother the US that many countries would adopt dollarization? you understand, I understand, I don't. it's not been a, it's not been a discussion I've been part of where I've, we've even discussed whether it's a good thing or bad thing. I mean, I think everybody, everybody will. my colleagues and I all agree High inflation is bad. it's bad for the US, it's bad for other countries and I am very sympathetic with countries that are taking aggressive measures to get inflation in check, because it's the foundation for economic Prosperity, hopefully to follow and it's uh. so I understand why some countries do it and uh, but I also. it's not Costless. I have a question I would ask as a student: sure, how was your your transition from being a space engineer to to economics and being a in public office? what was your motivation? what was your? I, yeah, so I was a, I, yeah, I. I done my bachelor's and Masters in engineering and worked in Aerospace for a few years. and the path before me, my managers were encouraging me to get my PhD in engineering and I knew if I had done that, I would have been committing my whole career to engineering and I wasn't ready to make such a commitment. so I decided to go back to business school and get my MBA to learn about finance and economics and accounting, and then I went into banking, because you know business school students, MBA students in the US tend to most often do one of two things: they go into Consulting and they go into Banking, and I didn't know much about either, so I just kind of picked Banking and went into banking. um, so fascinating. four years later I was at Goldman Sachs. the CEO of Goldman Sachs was selected to be treasury secretary of the United States. the name was Hank pulson, and I had the opportunity to go with him as an aid to the treasury secretary. and the most fascinating thing happened, I found, when I started working with economists on policy issues and learning from them. I found that I use my engineering training much more than I use my MBA, because what do engineers do? at the end of the day? it's problem solving. you have a certain problem, you have certain tools. you want to bring those tools to try to solve this problem. that's what Engineers do. that's actually what policy makers are trying to do too, and so I actually found my engineering training was excellent training, even though it was different. I mean, I'm not using my thermodynamics or my fluid dynamics- uh, I'm having to learn new tools and new Frameworks and whatnot- but the analytical approach is actually very, very similar, and so I found that was good preparation. thank you very much. yes, Lucas, sorry if I, if I can have another one, sure payments, how come? you know, in the US it takes like some hours to make a a transfer from bank to bank. sometimes, except for venmo, in Brazil, Argentina, many other countries, we have instant transfers. so in a sense, I I I feel that the US system is not, as you know, efficient for payments and related. a second question, H: would you consider cbdcs or any other sort of way through which non US citizens can hold actually fed printed dollars other than other than the physical dollars, other than the physical dollars? yet, like in my cell phone I have, like, dollars that are issued by you, not by a us Bank? yeah, I think it would be a very profitable product, but, Ian, it's for you to decide. so the payments landscape in the US is quite complex. uh, first of all, the private sector has innovated instant, uh, approximated instant payments, just like you said. so I could send anybody $5 doar with venmo or PayPal or any number of private sector Solutions. so they're using the Legacy systems and building a real-time interface on top of it. at the same time, uh, like, the Federal Reserve has now launched a service called fed now which should go to real-time instant payments. we've seen so far low adoption. so we rolled this out a couple years ago. we've so far seen low adoption of transactions, of our instant payment system. I think it's because the private sector already created effective instant payments with venmo and things like that, that that customer need has already been met. now, over time, you know, we'll see what ends up happening. um, in terms of something like a cbdc, I I go back to the Bitcoin question, which is what problem do we think it solves? so in the US we have a problem that not everybody is what we call banked. we have some small percentage of the population that does not have a bank account, does not have a credit card. um, they, it's a cash economy, basically, and then they end up getting charge very high rates. they get their paycheck. they go to a money lender Who cashes the paycheck very, very high rates. it's very costly. so some people say: well, the cbdc could help with financial inclusion. I've seen no evidence that that's true. why would a cbdc improve Financial inclusion? I'm not ruling out the possibility, but I haven't seen any evidence of it. or another one people will say is: well, crossb remittances are very expensive, maybe a cbdc will make that better. so I'll give you an example that I always- this is the the question that I POs to the proponents. my wife is from the Philippines. she's an American citizen, but she was born in the Philippines. all of her family is in the Philippines. so I always ask: if I want to send my father-in-law a100 us to buy groceries, how would this work? so I send them $100. he has, he has your account C, he is US cbdc Dollars goes into his account instantly. how did you buy groceries? you still has to convert it to the local currency or the grer. well, there it is. that's the answer. or the grocer has it. so what the proponents are really saying? they're not talking about the advantage of a cbdc. they're talking about the advantage of ubiquity. if everybody's using the same payment system all around the world, all these frictions go away and all these countries give up their own monetary policies so effectively. take that to its logical extreme. everybody just dollariz and the whole world uses dollars. I mean, I get that there's some efficiencies of doing that. there also some real constraints and costs of doing that too. so the you, the Federal Reserve, we have people who are studying a cbdc. uh, I asked some people in Europe. so Europe is quite excited about a cbdc in Europe and I asked some folks in Europe. I said: can you explain this to me? what is the? what is the problem that this European cbdc is going to solve? and what somebody who I'm not going to name shared with me is that they don't like being beholden to the major Us credit card Network Works- Visa Mastercard in American Express- and they have so far been unable to launch a European competitor. and maybe the aura of a cbdc will help them launch a competitor to Visa Mastercard in American Express. I said, okay, I don't know if it's going to work, but I at least understand that rationale. I have not seen the rationale for the us. all right, we're good, I've got some rebuttal coming. yeah, um, follow-up question. uh, just to take the baby Advocates place first. uh, the cost is not in the exchange but in the transfer, if you're talking about remittances, for instance. so the exchange per se should be Cost Less in Philippines or anywhere else and the transfer will cheaper if you have a cbdc ra rather than Western Union. that would be a counterargument. on top of that, there are people are thinking that the transmission mechanism- if you have interest- interest right there in cbdc might be stronger- at the expense of banks, probably so there is a tradeoff there. but there is one argument I've seen about the CBDs: uh, the third argument, which more hypothetical, is what happen if everybody else hasn't has CB, like the Euro. China is trying to go there, and whether that would that induce the US to re think the cbdc should just to compete with these other digital currencies. Fair, fair point. I mean, we're going to watch it. nobody, nobody, has made any decisions. ultimately, the we've been clear. the US Congress would have to authorize the Federal Reserve to do this. if we end up seeing that there are benefits of it that are not apparent to me today, and it's actually a useful instrument and there's political support for it, then anything's anything is possible in the future. you know, I would say the US Federal Reserve is not always the first. we were not the first formal inflation targeter. you know. we came along after time. only in 2012 do we identify a formal 2% inflation Target. many other central banks had adopted a formal Target later. so we definitely watched what's happening around the world and learn from that and weave that into our thinking. thank you, yeah, no, at dcv I heard the rationale for the cbdc to be that there might be situations of a crisis in which people would prefer to have the option of having a central bank liability to a Commercial Bank liability, and that they don't expect the cbdc to be widely used, but would be a tool that might be handy instead of Distributing cash in a situation where there is a large demand for cash. okay, I, I'm just repeating what heard. I hear you, I hear you, they, you, yeah, yeah. so Andre's joke is: that's how you facilitate Bank runs. people get scared. take all your money out of the banks, put it in your central bank account and all there. one global bank run in all European Banks. I mean, I'm saying that in just. that's not their goal, but you know, okay, one up any other questions in the back. there's one more in the back. one more question. we are on the verge of uh NE. my question is: with I reducing the need for skill jobs, do you think a universal basic income will be necessary? and also, how could it? how could it affect inquality around the world? how does it affect which around the world? the inequity around the world, inequity, yeah, I'm sorry. um, so if AI is effective, do we need to go to Universal basic income. is that, the first part, Fair one? yeah, that's true. um, I mean, I'm quite skeptical of a bunch of Silicon Valley Big Wigs like to talk about this Utopia or dystopia of you know, 20 people generate all the ideas and everybody else lives on a universal basic income. um, I mean, I think it's appropriate for a science fiction movie. I, I'm bullish on labor. you know, one of the constants of modern economic history is people keep forecasting we're going to run out of food and and we're going to run our work. both of those have been wrong. there's been tremendous Innovation. agriculture has gotten more productive. we've managed to feed the world, uh, and can continue to do so. and the nature of jobs has changed. most workers worked on farms. then everyone said, oh, they're going to be, they're going to starve. no, they mored in the factories. so the nature of work is going to change. uh, I I'm skeptical that AI is going to put a lot of people out of work. so I don't, I don't think Universal basic income is on the in in our forecast. okay, so thank you very much. thank you very much. really enjoy great to be.