https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-participates-in-panel-discussion-at-the-central-bank-of-the-argentine-republics-2024-money-and-banking-conference

Neel Kashkari participates in panel discussion at the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic’s 2024 Money and Banking Conference

October 14, 2024

Buenos Aires, Argentina

Neel Kashkari

welcome you all. you're most welcome. we are proud and happy to have you here with the new edition of the man and banking seminar of the Central Bank of Argentina in this spectacular room, and I'd like to share with you that the man and banking seminar is an event that attracts 300 to 400 people, but this year we had to limit the number of people who have registered to 1,700, which is the maximum capacity of this room. this doesn't mean that they all will be present at the same time, but so happy to have you here with our agenda in place. the underlying idea of these ideas is to put a break on the spe of everyday Affairs and fight an environment where we can think about our economy with a broader perspective, trying to learn new things and in an effort to create an environment that would be intellectually fertile. we try to have participants who share insights with us from different angles, answer questions: why have we reach again a situation? inflation, what about the experiences of other countries that are relevant to Argentina in the context of declining inflation? and also what we can expect from our economy if we remove fiscal deficit and reduce inflation is sustained fashion. let me share with you how we do think about the structuring of the different topics and participants speakers. first we chose fiscal deficits, monetary policy and inflation. fiscal dominance is at the heart of the state, the center of the state, and one of the key points of the economic program was to uncor inflation expectations, Visa fiscal deficit and how to tackle it from the government, because we were discussing about the sustainability of the fiscal balance and it is very rare for us to see that we are not fulfilling with that. we're fulfilling those goals and we have also unored inflation expectations. so over the first s months of the year, expected inflation, according to REM, the Central Bank Market expectation report, was declining and it was always higher than what we could observe and notice. ination is not to say that fiscal dominance is the center of everything, because we have to think that over the last 20 years, every year the central bank provided financing to the treasury, even in years of primary Surplus- more than 60% of monetary Mission. only in the last four years the central bank provided funding for 22 point of GDP. cleaning up the balance sheet of the Central Bank reverses this Capital flows and, for the very first time, the treasure is contributing to improve the balance sheet of the Central Bank and it. it shows a contractionary element in the money supply, as announced by the Nobel Prize winner. concerning the relevance of Institutions, how important they are and significant for economic development. so we are laying emphasis once again on institutionalization, which is of the essence, and we are celebrating that today we have made that announcement. and going back to the different panels and speakers, presenters, we are very proud of the presenters and speakers who have accepted this invitation, that is to say, to combine policy makers, on the one hand, allowing us to learn from their experience, combining that with academics- help us understand all these Concepts and design ex tools, as the development of our programs is showing us more challenges- and, on top of these experiences, decision makers from the private sectors, especially from the financial sector. as regards policy makers, we have a panel on current policy with Neil Kar and pabl, and then two policy maker thinking about the implementation of the implementation program: leer and Franco, Brazil and Israel, and another with Peru and cases which have a very important element with B monetarism, with dollars, because both societies, when a stabilization programs started, they were thinking and saving in dollar terms. three academic Palace, three fiscal dominance and with Financial dominance, which has to do with government inness and the impact on policy design. the third element here: two panels: decision makers, International investors, Clary Bank of America St and stop from Med life, and participants from our local Financial assistant, faan from B. just to combine these three, acces, we have two more panels on a cross-sectional way: analyst and academics and experience in real economy monitoring the decisions made by policy makers in the field of economic policies: Ric and Rafa, and, inclosing this, pran vering, the Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of artina, who is the official notaker of this event and will share us with takeaways, will give us a closing speech. and, out of agenda, I have something to share with you that tomorrow afternoon, president of Argentina kavier M will come here because he accepted to come here and make an off agenda invitation. he accepted the invitation some time ago but of course, we wanted to some maintain the confidentiality Vis the original audience and we wanted to be absolutely sure that we're we're going to keep it a secret and now we are disclosing it publicly. and before starting with the panel sessions, I have a couple of housekeeping matters to share with you to make this experience much richer. in this case, uh, whenever panels have speakers that are not fluent in Spanish. panels will be conducted in English because everyone May understand better, make the most of the panel and have translation services if needed. I want to thank uh speakers first, uh, International speakers: uh, because they have traveled extensively and intensively to come to Argentina. they are interested in our country and we hope that this experience will be very useful and profitable for you. so for us, it's very valuable to have you here. and also those speakers who have not come here. we are very thankful to them because they are presenting at an environment that requires time, effort and energy, and, of course, the staff of the Argentina members of the organizing committee, day after day, go in the extra mile. remember that we operate a central bank that is facing interesting es and we are now devoting our time, our bandwidth. time requires effort and additional commitment from all the stuff. this is the first time that we are organizing an event like this. this place, which has been originally for short events, mean music performance and musical uh concerts. so, uh, of course, we have rigorous rules. we have to abide by those rules. please do not come to this room with Beverages and food and please uh try to abide by all this rules so that we can keep on organiz events here and, as regards the uh orderly arrangement of panelists and concerning Q&A sessions, we are not going to have answers from the audience to the panel, so our Central Bank research, economic research division members have prepared questions to be asked uh to the panelist, but if you come across any panelist while we are having coffee, please feel free to ask your questions to the panelists during coffee break, and this is all. I hope that you will enjoy this event very much, that you will learn a great deal from it, and then we will be bble to recover elements and insights that will help us have a much more propos economic uh progress. and now let's start with panel number one: Central bankers and their insights. we thank the governor of the BC and we invite him to be part of the first panel as moderator. we have have, then, the international speakers for this panel. we will present the perspective of central banks. among the the topics we'll talk about the incidence of fiscal Pol policy in the overall monetary cycle. we have Neil Kashkari, president and CEO of the FED in Minneapolis and member of the open markting committee. he also contributed to the creation of opportunity and inclusive growth instit uh. in 2014, he ran for as governor of California and he also worked in the financial sector- uh, in Goldman Sachs and Pano in the public um Arena. he worked in the Department of Treasury of the US. he supervised a trouble assets relief program during the financial crisis. he also has a a masters in mechanic engineering, both from the University of Illinois and his MBA from the Wharton School in the University of Pennsylvania. Pablo hernandos was governor of the bank of Spain between 2018 and 2024. currently, he Prides over the consultative technical Committee of the European systemic risk board. he was member of also the government Council and the general Council of the central European Central uh bank, and he was also president of the banking supervision committee. he was part also of international European committees. he has a PHD in economics by the computa University of Madrid. he also has a graduate degree in economic sciences and corporate Sciences, UNF and- uh a law, going to switch to English now. um, so the way, the way this panel is designed to work is we're going to have a short presentation by Neil and a short presentation by Paulo, and then we will open it up to my questions and so whenever you're ready. well, uh, thank you. um. my name is Neil kesari, president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank. first of all, I want to thank Governor basili. it is an honor to be here with you and with Dr Doos from Spain. uh, I've had the pleasure of meeting Governor basil a few times in the past year as he has visited the United States. uh, this is my first visit to Argentina. I'm excited to see the country during this important economic time period and also have the opport hope to have the opportunity to return again in the future. so thank you for the invitation. I'm going to offer some remarks today about current and future monetary policy in the United States, but I will first briefly touch on some historical context that I think you here in the audience may find relevant to your work as you bring inflation down in Argentina. let me start by noting U my standard disclaimer that the views I offer today represent my own views and not necessarily others in the Federal Reserve System or the the Federal Open Market Committee. now let me look at us history for a moment. going back in time, the United States Constitution was first ratified in 1788. it wasn't until approximately 70 years later that the first national currency, the Greenback that we are all familiar with today, was issued. it was created by President Lincoln, who introduced the national currency and federal debt at that time as mechanisms to finance his effort to the Civil War. you know, a saying in the US that you've probably heard is that necessity is the mother of invention, and that is certainly true for importing Economic Institutions in the United States. so in the mid 1860s the US had both a national currency and federal debt, but we still didn't have a central bank. it wasn't until the US economy was hammered by banking crisis, uh, and economic depressions in the late 1800s and early 1900s, including a big one, the Panic of 1907, that political consensus finally emerged to establish a central bank, the Federal Reserve, which was created by an act of Congress in 1913. and then I I will for forward in a few minutes that in 1979. it took that long until the actual modern, independent monetary policy was established in the United States. so a key consideration and my point of this history just is to show that, at least in the US's case, it's taken a long time to get where we are. there have been a number of attempts, starts, false starts, steps backwards, ultimately to get to where we are today and we think we're in a pretty good place, which I'm going to show you now. a key for politicians in the US was ensuring that different regions in the United States were directly represented in the policy process. so they designed when they created the Federal Reserve. they designed a distributed structure with the Federal Reserve board located in Washington DC C and 12 independent federal reserve banks that are spread out around the country. this is not dissimilar to the European Central Bank today, which of course, consists of the executive board located in Frankfurt and the individual country Banks, whose Representatives sit on the governing Council. I'm sure Dr Doos will provide more details about the ECB and his remarks. the Minneapolis fed, which I lead, which is there at the top of the screen, represents what we call the ninth Federal Reserve District, which includes the Northern Central States of Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, part of Michigan and part of Wisconsin, while each of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents represents our individual regions. at the Federal Open Market Committee we each make a recommendation for monetary policy that we think is right for the country as a whole. so I'm not saying let's do something for Minnesota. I'm using my judgment to say what's right for the us as a whole. now, one of the most important assets of the Federal Reserve that enables us to Be an Effective Central Bank is our credibility with the public, including, of course, the American people, whom we are charged to serve, and investors around the world. they have learned that we will do our very best to make monetary policy decisions that help us achieve the goals that the US Congress has assigned to us- stable prices and maximum employment- and, as I will discuss shortly, the US and international experience provides a strong case for central banks to focus on pursuing price stability as a precondition for robust economic performance. inflation is an unfair tax on incomes. it increases income inequality. it undermines confidence. when citizens don't have to worry about inflation, spending and investment decisions are less uncertain, and the financial sector is better able to channel savings to borrowers. now, most importantly, our credibility is supported by the institutional Independence of the Federal Bank- Federal Reserve- from the executive branch of government. while we are ultimately accountable to the American people through their elected representatives, we are not making policy decisions to benefit any political party or any individual politicians, as I will explain in a moment, this credibility to focus on our economic goals without consideration of politics did not always exist in the US. it took a long time to build that credibility and establishing it came at significant initial economic cost. but once established, this credibility has laid the foundation for economic prosperity for the last four decades in the United States. so let me now look. look at history. uh, this is. we had a very uh acute crisis in the 1970s in America of high inflation and high unemployment. in the 1960s, on the lefthand side of your chart you can see the US enjoyed a period of low unemployment and generally low inflation. inflation is in the red line, unemployment is on the blue line and you can see inflation in the 1960s was around 2% and it started to climb toward the end of the uh decade. but in the 1970s, when oil prices skyrocketed all around the world, the US economy experienced a prolonged period of what we call stagflation. there were deep recessions, very high unemployment and high inflation. inflation climbed almost six times from around 2% to almost 12% in the 1970s. now, in an attempt to mitigate output in job losses, the Federal Reserve at that time did not aggressively increase interest rates, partly in response to political pressure from elected officials. the academic consensus today agrees that in doing so, the Federal Reserve contributed to an un anchoring of inflation expectations and increased macroeconomic instability, ultimately undermining our own institutional Effectiveness. but as you see, let me look ahead now. uh, it wasn't until President Carter appointed a new Federal Reserve chair, Paul voker, in 1979, that the Federal finally turned its primary focus to fighting inflation. chair vulker aggressively restrained the growth in the money supply, effectively raising rates to about 20%, triggering a severe economic contraction and high unemployment. these painful actions, however, paid off. by 1983, inflation had fallen to under 4%. so if you look at the green line on the left hand side, you can see that the, the effective policy rate, was taken almost to 20%, a dramatic increase. the Great shading are recessions that resulted from those policy actions. and if you look on the right, you can see inflation, the red line and the unemployment rate, the Blue Line. inflation climbed until they finally aggressively addressed it with monetary policy. it resulted in a very, uh, deep recession. the unemployment rate went up, but then the unemployment rate came back down and inflation came down, setting us on the path of prosperity for the next 40 years. now, importantly, President Carter's successor, President Ronald Reagan, who was from the opposing political party, reappointed chair vulker, thus endorsing vul's approach to using monetary policy to keep inflation in check. this established a pattern in the United States of presidents reappointing fed chairs who had been appointed by the predecessor of a different party, and that pattern has been repeated now many times in the LA in the next 40 years. this pattern was instrumental in establishing the political support for the Federal Reserve to be an independent Central Bank solely focused on economic goals rather than on political ones. so now let's look forward. uh, this Independence does not mean that the Federal Reserve never coordinates with the government. indeed, in two major crises of the past 20 years- the global financial crisis of 2008 and the covid crisis of 2019, uh, and excuse me, covid-19 crisis of 2020- the Federal Reserve worked closely with the US Treasury Department to design crisis response policies to help reduce damage to the real economy from these shocks. in both cases, the fed's coordination with the government did not come at the expense of us trying to meet our inflation and import and employment goals. rather, the coordination was done to help the Federal Reserve achieve these goals. so, although the sources of those crises were very different, in both cases the US economy faced a weakening economy, a large increase in unemployment and potential deflation. the fed and the executive branch of government work together to support the economy and reduce damage from the crisis, thus supporting our monetary policy objectives. now, if you look what happened after the disinflation of the vulker era, so the early 1980s had a rapid decline in inflation and then you basically had low and more or less stable inflation for the next 30 Years. you saw in the um great financial crisis of 2008, inflation went very briefly negative, but it didn't lead to a deflationary spiral, and then inflation was more or less stable at around our 2% Target, going into the covid-19 pandemic. now, of course, restoring jobs and successfully averting deflation was not the final chapter of the impact of covid on the US economy. the economy recovered quickly and then the US and most economies around the world faced an enormous unexpected increase in inflation, surprising my colleagues and me at the Federal Reserve and most economic forecasters. so what caused the high inflation postco? with the benefit of hindsight, the causes are now clear. first, Global Supply chains for goods were disrupted by the pandemic and took much longer to restore than we had expected. second, with most of the services side of the economy closed due to covid, spending was disproportionately directed at the good sector, which was already facing disrupted Supply. many workers left the labor force due to business closures and were reluctant to return, in part of ongoing potential health risks. significant fiscal and monetary stimulus had been directed at the economy in anticipation of an extended Public Health crisis. when the the effective vaccines became available much sooner than expected, the need for that stimulus was reduced. and then, of course, Russia invaded Ukraine, sending a price shock through commodity markets all around the world. each of these factors was likely somewhat inflationary on its own, but combined became highly inflationary for an extended period of time. so if you look here on the lehand chart, you can see unemployment rate. the blue skyrocketed when covid first hit and much of the services economy in the United States was shut. the services economy reopened, unemployment started to fall. but then we had this for the in recent era unprecedented Surge and inflation in the US. that surprised me, surprised most of my colleagues and many economic forecasters. but you can also see it turned around. uh, it felt long, but it actually turned around fairly quickly. is now, uh, come down fairly quickly. so what caused the fall in inflation? uh, well, in response to the increase in inflation, the Federal Reserve and most central banks around the world raise rates aggressively to bring inflation down. you can see the federal funds rate on the right chart, uh was around uh, you can see 1 and a half% before the pandemic, went to zero during the pandemic and then we raised the policy rate north of 5% and held it there for an extended period of time. now, historically, such a large increase in the policy rate had often led to recessions, like what happened in the early 1980s that I showed you when chairman vulker. raise rates created a deep recession in the US, but in this time inflation fell while economic growth was sustained. how did this happen? while we're still in the final stages of bringing inflation back down to our 2% Target, it seems clear to me that substantial progress was made in unwinding many of the supply factors that led to the increase in inflation in the first place. Supply chains were eventually restored, the services economy was reopened, taking pressure off the good sector. workers returned to the labor force and an increase in Immigration to the United States led to an increase in labor Supply. the war- the war in Ukraine thus far has not intensified further and commodity markets have stabilized. what role did monetary policy play in bringing inflation down? tight monetary policy likely did reduce demand for goods and services somewhat, thus helping bring inflation down. but, reflecting on the important mistakes of the 1970s, the most important role that monetary policy played was keeping longrun inflation expectations anchored and reinforcing the federal reserve's credibility with the public that we would do what was needed to bring inflation down. that confidence was a key factor in achieving what so far has proven to be a remarkably strong labor market with rapid disinflation. so this chart is a chart of that actual inflation that I showed you. the red line is the inflation you can see it was running 2% or just below 2% going into covid. then you had this big run up in inflation and then the subsequent fall. the blue line is a market indicator of long run inflation expectations. it's in, it's what do Market, what do markets expect inflation to be for a 5year period, 5 years in the future, and you can see it barely moved during this period. this, to me, is a demonstration of what uh credibility looks like that we enjoy as a central bank. that makes our what, makes us more effective and it makes our job easier. but we have to do our part to maintaining this credibility and that's what we- what I believe we did so much with the policy rate in the United States. so, turning to the Future. what is the outlook for monetary policy in the US? the Federal Reserve is committed to achieving our dual mandate goals of stable prices and maximum employment. today, monetary policy remains in an overall restricted stance, though just how restrictive is somewhat unclear to me. the labor market remains strong. the most recent jobs report is encouraging that a rapid labor weakening does not appear to be imminent. inflation has come down dramatically from its peak but remain somewhat above our Target. as of right now. it appears likely that further modest reductions in our policy rate will be appropriate in the coming quarters to achieve both sides of our dual mandate. ultimately, the path ahead for policy will be driven by the actual economic, inflation and labor market data. so let me wrap up. what are some of the key lessons from the US experience that might be relevant, uh to others around the world, including here in Argentina? first, low and stable inflation is a precondition for long-term macroeconomic Prosperity. second, achieving low inflation may require short-term economic pain to both reduce inflation in the short run but also to establish institutional credibility. so inflation remains low and in control over the long run. and finally, while the individual reforms will be specific to meet the needs of the individual economy. ultimately, the specific institutional structure should be designed as much as possible to endure over a range of Economic and political Cycles. thank [Applause] you okay. is it working? yes, okay, well, thank you. thank you very much uh, president bili uh for the invitation. uh. let me also thank the staff of the central bank for perfect organization and, of course to to president kasari for excellent presentation and, I hope, also excellent discussion. after my my talk uh I will try to provide um some complimentary uh elements uh from, of course, the European perspective and uh we, given the the title of the conference, which is about fiscal deficits, monetary policy and inflation, I will try to concentrate on how we have tried, at European monetary Union, to solve these fiscal and and monetary interactions um. so let me first Focus uh for a few minutes on what was the European monetary Union framework um that was settled back in 1999 to precisely try to uh solve the potential interactions between monetary and fiscal policy. as you perfectly know, the European Central Bank is an independent Central Bank that it is focused mainly on uh price stability. that's the main objective uh and very important, of course, this price stability mandate is focus on the European monetary Union as as a whole. so there is a single monetary policy for the whole European monetary Union and then, and there are uh fiscal policies that are in the hands of national governments, currently 20 National governments that belong to the European monetary monetary Union. so from the very uh beginning, it was perceived that, um, there was a certain need for coordination of national fiscal policies and also to set some limits to fiscal policy in order, precisely, to allow for a monetary regime, uh to to work. and this is why, from the very beginning there, there was this Clause, uh in the European Union Treaty, of prohibition of monetary financing for the, for the Central Bank, um, but there is even a no, no bailout clause for uh one country or the whole Union, for any other country that might have difficulties in terms of fiscal sustainability. with this, what it was intended is precisely to to countries to focus on guaranteeing fiscal sustainability in know, not creating any spillovers, negative spillovers to the rest of the monetary, of the monetary Union, and the assumption that market discipline, the mar, the discipline that is provided by markets through, for example, higher spreads, might not work always as as intended. um, and this is, in the end, why also, the European mon Union was created with a very clear fiscal rule. there was a limit for member countries should avoid excessive deficits and excessive deficit was defined as a 3% deficit limit and also public that the level levels that should not um be higher than 60% of uh of GDP, uh and uh. at the same time, there was a, the monitoring device, the European commission was tasked to monitor public finances in individual memb States and, of course, there was even a corrective arm of the so-called stability and growth pact by which countries that violated the rules would be subject to this corrective F of the GP and there might be even in the string, in a string case, even sanctions to to individual, to individual countries. so, in other words, to a certain extent, This legal framework is trying to guarantee that the regime under which the European monetary Union is working is a, a monetary, a monetary regime, monetary dominance regime and not a fiscal dominance regime. and of course, the main reason for this were very well explained by President KAS Kashkari- is is the intention and the, the perception- based on, of course, all the analytical work that had been done in the economic literature- that price stability is a precondition for the welfare of uh, of our citizens. so that's the, the framework, how this framework work. well, it didn't work as as intended, and here in this slide, what I have it's a summary of all the literature that has been produced since the creation of the European mon monetary Union, precisely on the, trying to put some evidence on how the the framework has worked. first, fiscal policy has tended to be procyclical, so this means that countries basically have not used good times in order to reduce their public deficits uh, and in the end, when there was a down term, there was also procyclical Behavior because, of course, markets were putting all the pressure on fiscal sustainability of countries and this oblig many countries to reduce the deficits precisely in the in in the down term. okay, so to a certain extent, one of the intentions of the European monetary Union was precisely to avoid this type of behavior, so we can say that it didn't work as as intended. and then, of course, the second uh main evidence that is also very easy to to be seen is that the framework did not prevent a general increase in in public debt levels, and the reality is, of course, it. not only the average uh of the Deb to GDP ratio in the Euro area is higher than 60%, but it is also the case that many individual countries, uh including Spain, France, Italy, uh have the two GDP ratios that are above 100- 100, 100% um. third point that I wanted to make on the on the evidence that we have on how uh the framework has worked, is that putting so much focus on on fiscal and the sustainability to certain extent also avoid it to pay more attention to other imbalances that might also create very negative spillovers within a monetary Union, and this is about uh private inbet, uh housing Bubbles and, of course, current accoun IM balances. and, for sure, the Spanish case before the Global Financial crisis is a good is a good, uh is a good example. um. fourth point I wanted to to mention is, of course, that from the very beginning- and for some, there was an obvious missing elements of the element of the framework. the framework didn't have supranational fiscal elements, so, in other words, it was very difficult uh in such a context, with a single monetary policy and individual fiscal policies, to have the right policy mix given the macroeconomic conditions in in each moment in in time. and, of course, all these problems, in the end, uh were uh became absolutely evident during the global financial crisis and and in particular, during the European sovereign debt crisis that, in many countries was the origin of it was precisely the, the lack or the, the worries that the market was putting on fiscal sustainability, and this is would justify many legal changes that were made, in particular on the fiscal framework, during the Europe an Sovereign Deb crisis that to to to Great extent, they have still not work as as intended. that this is why- and I will um focus at the end of my intervention on this- they have led to a new change in the fiscal rule, um that was approved this uh this year. so let me now uh provide some background. what has happened during the last five, six years? okay, in terms of, again, of the monetary fiscal interactions, starting with the pandemic and probably the pandemic shock, which was a completely exogenous shock to the, to the economy. um, it provided probably the, the, the, the, the context for precisely a good and coordinated fiscal and monetary policy response. when mentioning coordinated fiscal and monetary policy response, I should say that it was an implicit coordination, so there was not an agreement, a common agreement. so each part- fiscal Authorities, on the one hand, and the monetary Authority on the other- doing uh their jobs, uh according to their mandates- uh, in the end, provided the right stimulus to the economy, precisely to guarantee that such an exogenous but extraordinary and dramatic shock um didn't have, didn't create structural um problems or damage to employment or and damage to to to the productive capacity and and economic growth of of European, of European countries. and this coordinated response, and similar to other countries, was basically monetary policy, ensuring that uh favorable Financial conditions were maintained. and this was done, given that the European Central Bank was already at the lower bound and the fact the lower bound. it was done through non-standard monetary measures such as the, the famous PPP pandemic emergency P program. but also the fiscal response this time reli not only on the individual actions of each individual fiscal Authority but, for the first time, there was also a supranational policy action. there was disagreement to have the, the so-called Next Generation nu nu funds, which was a very significant magnitude that, just to give an idea for the Spanish case, this has represented uh 12 percentage points of GDP distributed in six years. okay, so we you distributed linearly, this means a potential fiscal action coming from Europe of 2 percentage points per year, so which have, as you can imagine, it has been of a very significant impact, has had a very significant impact on the, on the, on the, on the economy, okay, um, but again one point that I wanted to stress: that this coordination, um, it was uh completely explicit, implicit for sure, but it was also an adop uh response. so there was a need for governments to to go to Brussels and to discuss for for hours in order to to lead to such an agreement. so there was not an implicit or explicit rule that could lead to such a good outcome, and I will come back back to to this- what, for me, is a missing element of the fiscal framework in Europe to at the end of my, of my intervention. then we enter- and uh, president kasari explained it very, very well to- to the next moment in in this um very recent period, which was the, the episode of very high inflation, that in particularly in the European case, this was mainly due to a very uh negative Supply shock coming from the exit from the pandemic on the one H, but also for the by the increase on Energy prices. you have to take into account that Europe is a kind of an island in terms of um is completely dependent on on foreign energy. so the an increase, the significant increase of energy prices, is a kind of a deterioration of the terms of trade of um of Europe, uh, and of course this led to to higher inflation and also to to lower, to lower activity, to lower growth, also in a cont of very high uncertainty. in this context, of course, monetary policy, and very similar to the justifications that has been provided by president cascar, to the US case, uh, the reaction of the ECB has been very similar, with the largest and quickest hiking cycle in the history of the European monetary Union and also with quantitative tightening. so first, of course, the ECB put an end to quantitative fing and then started also to to reduce the, the balance. in our case, mainly the main element for the reduction of the of the balance, it has been by dropping the long-term financing operations, to, to our, to our banks, uh, and again, I'm very similar to the recommentation that was made by President kasari: uh, all the evidence that we have is that this has been absolutely critical in keeping inflation expectations anchor. uh. so to certain extent, the fact that inflation expectations remain anchor is the combinations of two things: for sure, all the credibility that the European Central Bank had gained during its existence, but also it was the the, this very, um, very decisive action that was taken. that was also necessary in order precise to to keep and to maintain such credibility on the fiscal front. here we started to have some tensions in terms of the fiscal and monetary interaction because there was also under this contest, under this very negative Supply sock, there was a response by fiscal policy in order to try to mitigate the impact of the energy and also the food prices- let's not forget also about the food price increase- uh shock, um, uh, which to certain extent they help, for example by reducing B tax at the beginning of the of the energy. so they they help to contain inflationary presses in the initial fa phase, although of course, once that they are eliminated, are creating also inflationary pressures because of course B move up gain once it was considered that energy price was, was sending um. and perhaps, what it was more important, it was also the focus of some analysis that was done by the international monetary fund, not only for Europe but for the whole world economy, that many of the measures that uh were taken by fiscal policy makers were not sufficiently selective, not sufficiently Target, which in the end resulted in a too expansionary fiscal input and to what, to certain extent, it made the the life of the monetary policy maker of the European Central Bank, in this case, more more complicated. okay, so the expansion that it was created, the support that it was creating to the economy, it was uh, too, too, too high. um, yes, now then, uh, the next episode in this uh, um, in this period has uh, has been uh, of course, the, the reduction in inflation. but before entering into this last part, let me also Focus one element that it is particularly relevant for the functioning of the European monetary Union. so many people were expecting that such a significant increase in rates in a very short period of time might have trigger a significant increase in, in spreads, in Sovereign spreads between member member states and the, and the reality is that it has not happened. um, I'm um my own view that this is a combination of factors that have to be to taken into account. some of them are more of an exogenous nature. some of them are more related to, uh, how monetary policy has been implemented during this period. on the, on the first group of factors, you have the. the reality is that the some countries which are currently very highly indebted have been those that have also been showing higher growth. to certain extent, this can be seen as we were lucky, and Spain is one of those of those countries, while other countries with much lower uh Deb to GDP ratios, public Deb to GDP ratios have been underperforming as compared to the average of the Euro area. uh, so this means that it didn't trigger, not the a very significant increase of on spreads. because of this reason, there was also there was a decision taken by for for several years, by treasuries, national treasuries- a very significant increase in the average B maturity, which meant that the impact of the higher interest rates was also very much smooth over over time. it took a while, and it's taking a while, for these higher interest rates to uh to imply higher interest payments because of this increasing the average B maturity. um, there was also the perception that the fiscal framework, after these NG funds that I was mentioning, had been strengthened. um, uh to that, to certain extent, if there was a problem again uh with um with the spreads, there might be also a reaction by by Europe and of course, this has- and this is a very important factor- this was uh. this has also taken place in a context on which there's been a risk appe, very high risk appetite by investors at the global, at the global level. but then I think we have also to take into account two other factors that are more related to the ECB policy actions that, to me, have also played a very significant role, precisely in order to avoid such developments in terms of the of of the spreads and the increase in the spreads between member states: the the first one- which also, by the way, um, how uh monetary policy has been working in the US- is that the reduction of the balance sheet that could have been an origin for the increase in the spreads has been done in a very predictable and gradual way, precisely because, well, it was the first time that we were many of Central Bank were doing QT uh, and we were, to certain extent, worried about the, the reaction of the markets to these developments, and we wanted to be very, very, very predictable, very and therefore very gradual, precisely in order to avoid these problems, also in terms of liquidity in the market. and then, second, and this is very specific to Europe, the European Central Bank announced, in July 20222, this transmission protection instrument, with the main objective on trying to guarantee that monetary policies transmitted equally in all uh individual countries within the European monetary Union. okay, so the the objective is that the transmission of monetary policy is done in an homogeneous way in order pres to preserve know this, this, the transmission across the whole uh European monetary Union. how the the TP work well, basically, um, the European Central Bank can announce possible interventions in the in the market by buying bonds of individual uh countries or, of course, moving from announcements to actually buying those uh uh those assets in order, precisely, to restore confidence and prevent um destabilizing rate spirals that the, in particular in a context of European monetary Union on which there is a lack of a common fiscal uh action, could be particularly relevant. uh, and also, I'm very much linked to um the framework that was defining at the very beginning in order to ensure that market discipline uh was there. so we that we avoid the kind of a movement to a to a fiscal dominance regime. uh, this uh the, the, the European Central Bank, um set some limits of and conditions in order for the European Central Bank to be able to, to to purchase under the TPI. the first is that the instruments can uh the instrument can only be used in countries that pursue sustainable fiscal and macro uh uh policies, and then the second, that the ECB cannot counter persistent tensions that are due to Country fundamentals. so, in other words, the interventions of the ECB come uh try to counteract the increasing spreads that are not uh focused on uh fundamentals, that are not b on fundamentals, and only if the the country that is affected is persan sustainable fiscal and macroeconomic policies. well, the fact that there was uh the forcefully action of DCB has not triggered a significant increase in sobering sprads between uh member states is, to me, uh critical, has been absolutely critically kind of a precondition for the ECB to be able to increase rates uh to such a large extent and so avoid the anchoring of inflation expectations and ensure price price stability. well, the, the reality is that, given all the evidence that I was providing before on the, on the, on the, on the problems in terms of the implementation of the fiscal framework, a new fiscal framework has been approved and it was approved by European Council at the beginning of this year. I'm not going to enter into the details. maybe later in the in the discussion I can be a bit more explicit, but the main elements of the new fror is that it puts all um the focus on uh the sustainability. so there is a death sustainability assessment. that of course requires um uh trying to anticipate what evolution of R minus G is for each individual country, um, which I think is a very positive uh? U development in terms of the of the of the fiscal framework, because it recognizes how growth uh and growth enhancing reforms, including, of course, structural reforms um, affect fiscal sustainability, that it provides also a kind of an incentive not only for fiscal consolidation of individual countries- that, of course, is critical in order to guarantee fiscal sustainability- but also in motivates, it creates an incentive for structural reforms in in in individual countries, and there is also an intermediate Target that is defin under a kind of expenditure rule that it has been also very positive in other fiscal regimes, precisely because, as well, an expenditure rule doesn't uh mean that countries uh that are setting a kind of a ceiling for for expenditure uh is is simply that when uh one country is defining the budget for the next year uh and assuming, for example, that initial position is a balance position, a fiscal balance position, if it wants to increase expenditure over what Devolution of nominal GDP would say, it will have also to provide a tax increase in order to finance this additional increase in expenditure that is not not related or is not linked exclusively to the evolution of the of the of the economy. uh, in the end, of course, to what extent this- the sustainability um focus plus expenditure rule- will provide for a more sustainable fiscal policy, more some fiscal policy in individual member states in Europe. it will depend very much on its effective imple implementation is, and this is why it is now absolutely critical, in particular in the first year of his application, that it will be. 2 is absolutely critical that all countries comply with the new fiscal framework. um, let me say what I think this will mean in the following two years and also very much related again with the interaction of monetary with monetary policy. uh, given the elevated levels of public debt in many countries, the implementation of this new framework will result clearly in a restrictive fiscal policy, and this has already been estimated in around 0.5 percentage points of GDP of fiscal consolidation in each year. okay, in the in the next, even five years. um, and you have to take into account that this will be um happening in a context on which the macro projections that are provided, for example, by the European Central Bank in in September, are compatible with the European Central Bank reaching its 2% medium-term inflation Target in a stable manner in already in 2025 and, of course, also in 2026. so so one of the questions that is already emerging in Europe is to what extent the implementation of this new fiscal framework that in the end, as I was saying, will require a fiscal restriction in the next four or five years, will um put inflation below our Target for a for a while. that's one of the big questions. um, well, in in this regard, I think what it is important to say is that, I mean, when you use any macro model, uh, it is true that 0.5% of fiscal adjustment for Europe would mean lower growth in the short rant and also lower inflation, but if you allow for the monetary policy, um re monetary policy reaction, in the end- I mean the impact on the economy is is not considered sufficiently significant. we have also to take into account that it is very important the composition of the adjustment, that it is not some. we have not only to look at whether the deficit is the structural deficit- is going to be reduced, but also to what extent this is going to be done through revenues or expenditures, and we know that the composition of thejust might matter uh precisely in in terms of the, the impact on on growth and also on on inflation, that we have all these ngu funds that I was mentioning before and that will will be present till 2026. precisely they can be used to compensate for the, for the negative impact of the Restriction of individual National fiscal policies on the, on the macro economy. and, of course, I think it's also important to emphasize, because this is one of the main motivations of the fiscal Frank was. I was, as I was mentioning- that if this fiscal U restriction in the following years is accompanied with adequate structural reforms, they could also imply higher potential output growth and lower R minus G, helping to fiscal sustainability in this. in this way, and let me just mentioning what I consider the, the main missing element of the, of the current uh fiscal monetary framework in the European context, which is um, related to the lack of a Central fiscal capacities, which, in the end, we don't have the central fiscal capacity. in the end. this means that it is very difficult to achieve the right policy mix at each policy, at each cyclical moment in, in, in, in, in time, um, the, the drag report, the so famous drag report. this is a report that has been published. a few weeks ago, uh made a a strong point about using uh fiscal, common fiscal instruments, in order to finance uh some public investment needs, the very much related to climate change, the digitalization and defense, for example, that can be considered clearly common public goods, uh and um. well, if we combine, on the one hand, the need for having an instrument, a fiscal instrument, that would provide, um the the right policy mix, uh monetary and and fiscal- in each moment in time, with this more structural element that it is considering in the drug report, this is something that we have to to consider if we want to have an European monetary Union that works properly. and with this, uh Sano, I will, I will end, thank you, thank you. thank you very much, both of you, uh, for your presentations. let me, um, I'm going to going to bring some questions up. if you have questions for each other, you have to ask for my per permission. let me start with the institutionality. given the the announcement of the Nobel Prize- and this is something that you both touch upon- it was very interesting to hear the governance for how you, as a board member of one of the feds within the FED system, make your decisions. you mentioned you look at at the country as a whole and not you don't have like a constituent that you, that you need to report to. but, Pablo, what about the ECB? when you were governor of the bank of Spain? you go, you sit there and your constituency is probably much better defined than in the case of the FED system, where you even have a series of of different regions or or states that are not even evenly distributed, right but? but in the case of the European Central Bank, you clearly represent the Spanish interest and maybe what accommodates, in terms of policy, monetary policy, Europe as a whole does not necessarily accommodate very comfortably Spain. how do you deal with that conflict of interest in that role? yes, well, the the conflict of interest is solved legally is when you signed the, when you are appointed governor of um one individual Central Bank, um, the contract that you sign, um, it is very in the contact is very explicitly said that when, uh, taking your positions on monetary policy, you have to to think for the Euro area as a whole. um, and I have to confess that in my six years of experience as, as governor of the bank of Spain, um, I have always had the feeling that this always been um the, the fact, so that all governors, 20 governors of the individual central banks, of course, the, the board members, the six bers that are CED in in in framfor, are always thinking about the Euro area as a whole. what um it might have had also some this potential conflict of interest that you were mentioned in Santiago, but it has probably had- is other consequences and there is always been discussion in Europe to what extent the minutes, the accounts of the monetary policy discussions had to be publish, including the individual positions of the governors and uh. to me, um, uh this: I've always been against this um, this publication with individual names, precisely because it can trigger a discussion on what a governor of a individual central bank that may be, the the monetary policy in such a in a specific context that it is the right one for the EUR as a whole, might not be particularly good for the individual country, might receive a lot of pressure. um, but in terms of the of the real conversation and the real actions that the governing Council uh has had during my term as Governor, uh, I mean this um Mandate of looking at the Euro area as a whole has always been fulfilled by all members of the of the council. it's interesting because you mentioned that during the last cycle of increasing interest rates in Europe, one of the concerns was that it would translate into higher spreads, higher financing cost for the, for the government and for the companies in each of the countries, and successfully. that didn't happen this time around, but there were other periods in which that that discussion was much more challenging. there was a period in which Spain was included into a group of countries that people refer to as pigs, yes, and the cost of financing, uh was not the same for each of these countries in for each of the European countries. I wonder whether that institutionality, that governance, was ever challenge, whether some regions in Spain maybe decided: you know what, why don't we print our own currency? or did, why didn't you get a call from the governor of the bank of Italy saying: Pablo, these rates are killing us, we have to do something about it? well, the reality is that maybe Spain is a is very specific, okay, because to let me complement- sorry, let me complement- the question with the whole membership of the Euro question. when, P when Spain decided to become a member of the, of the of the euro, it must have gone through tough decisions in terms of Independence on policy, uh, Independence as a, as a central bank, um adjustments that he had to go through. giving up. giving up a currency is probably a very, a very um complex decision, right, yes, no, the? the reality is that, um, the support of Spanish citizens to the European monetary Union has always been very, very high, including during the global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis, and to me, this is a combination of two of two factors: one is a more a historical, political, sociological Dimension, and the second is a more economic one. the first one is, uh, well, the fact that you know the, the Spanish history for us, Europe, to certain extent, in the image of all citizens, is uh, is, is freedom, okay, is democracy and uh, and this is uh, still uh, the case is very, is very strong. the perception that to, to certain extent, the, the connection and moving to democracy in in our case, was also very much related to forming part of of Europe, okay. and then the second one is more an economic. economic reasoning behind this disposition is that um- and the bank of Spain, by the way, contributed a lot to this perception, which is that most, if not all, the problems that the Spanish economy was facing during the global financial crisis were the were of a structural nature and therefore one could not uh say that monetary policy could solve them. they require, I mean, Spain reach. a current account deficit of it was above 10% right before the global financial crisis crisis. um dep to GDP ratios of the private sector, of both households and corporates, was well above the Euro area average housing prices. all the estimates that we had there were showing a clear um um uh of prices being clearly above the fundamentals. I mean, these were issues that could not be solved uh by by monetary, by monetary policy, but by, to certain extent, the problems of his Spanish economy was were due to the loss of competitiveness during the our first years in the European monetary Union, and this message, I think uh it was uh understood by by citizens, and they were putting the pressure on politicians in Spain and not so much in in the monetary policy that was decided by by the European Central Bank. and again, I think the bank of Spain made, I think, a huge effort in providing this analysis to to Citizens. uh, and I think it was also very good to to keep the cion and the support of Spanish citizens to to the European project and going a little bit more into fiscal dominance and and combining the experience in the US and and in Europe, uh, in particular, the Q, the QE period and the unwinding. in Argentina, we had a period of QE, but for different reasons. we had, um an increase in the size of the balance sheet of the Central Bank as a way to finance the treasury, as opposed to have the policy rate as a as a main objective or or the interest rate in the economy as as the main objective. given you know your experience, what you, what you've seen in in both in Europe and in the US, where this policy, STS, has gone through different political mandates, and you mentioned uh a deeper interaction, or more coordinated interaction with the treasuries, particularly during crisis periods. has that ever has? has the role of the QE implementation ever shifted or or or were? did you ever feel like politician were tempted with? uh shifting it towards? okay, here's a tool for accessing to financing that will contribute towards containing spreads, like in the case of of Spain? um, how? how did that interaction play in the? in the case of the US, it really was. um QE has been a decision of the Federal Reserve and the Federal Open Market Committee. as we looked at the data and the goals that we were trying to achieve. so, first, the modern day implementation was created in the financial crisis, when the federal funds rate had already been taken to zero and the question was: we were facing a potential deflationary shock and very high unemployment. so if you're facing low inflation and high unemployment, we're missing on both sides of our dual mandate. we need to provide more stimulus for the economy, and so using quantitive easing was a was a tool to try to drive long rates down, to provide more stimulus. but then, once we got through that period, uh, four or five years later, the Federal Reserve, actually on its own, uh, started to unwind it and did the first Q in shrinking the Federal Reserves balance sheet until around 2019, and then we've been doing that again, just as the ECB has in recent years, and I guess I would say a couple things. one is that the shocks- the financial crisis and covid- were obvious and identifiable to everybody in the world. uh, it was not an invention of any politician. these were real, and that's what motivated us and the data that we were looking at- the inflation data, the unemployment data- that was also very clear, and so it was easy to explain why we were doing this, given the situation. that was obvious to everybody around. and then, when we made the decision to now unwind quantitative easing and turn to quantitative tightening, it was in a context of very high inflation that everybody could see, everybody could feel. and so, uh, I guess I would just say the decisions have always been made by the Federal Reserve officials and it's always been made in a manner consistent with the, the clear objectives that we have identified, that we're trying to establish, and that's what enabled us to do it and have it not not be used for other purposes. um, it's um, it's very is is completely equal to what the president kasari has has said. um, I mean, all the justification for the E ECB moving into into QE uh was, of course, uh derived from the price stability mandate. uh, we were in a context of uh very low inflation, with some risk of of deflation, low growth and the Central Bank being subject to the to the lower, to the lower bound. so well, it was um obvious for for everybody that, in order to meet the target- the 2% medum 10 Target um, which was at risk at this time of uh for being permanently below the, the target we- we needed to move into into these non-conventional measures. at the same time, it's also obvious that there were some analysts- we cannot deny that they were emphasizing that this movement U towards QE could create some risk of fiscal dominance. okay, um, like we cannot, we cannot deny that. but to me, the, the actions that the European Central Bank uh has been taking during the last inflationary episode, the fact that the ECB um we were in a position to increase rates in a very significant come uh maned in a very short period of of time, moving, of course, from QE to QT um also immediately to. to certain extent, it has completely eliminated those uh, those perceptions of a potential risk for fiscal dominance because, again, all those decisions were taken um because of our the need to guarantee our price stability mandate, independently of what this might cause uh implic ation. this might cause for the, for the fiscal Authority um. so, again, as I was emphasizing at the beginning of the presentation, the, the framework that we had in in Europe is one uh that it is based on monetary dominance uh and uh, to certain extent or to Great extent, this last episode has been a, a clear? um example that this is a. this is the case independently of, in certain ccum circumstances. the ECP has to move to non-conventional message because it is at the lower, at the lower bound. let me ask you. let me ask you about um, policy transmission mechanisms, um, and and reading your, your latest essay, Neil um, you mentioned that in the essay you mention, mention that the first quarter of this year there was a concern that inflation had, um was might be suffering from some type of floor around 3%. um, maybe you know we have a similar discussion here in Argentina, whether it's TOS, whether there's some inflation inertia that will create a floor to inflation, and whether we're going to be able to break that floor. um, and and it was was interesting to read that that you felt the risk in the first quarter. unfortunately, you broke through that floor and you're much more comfortable with, with where you are today, and that gave you room to argue for a 50 basis points reduction in policy rates. what do you think would have happened if the floor had remained in place? what kind of tools do you think you might have been able to use in that? in that context- and let me tie this into a little bit, if we can uh- the analysis of forward, a forward looking analysis in the sense that there is a concern that an easing cycle by the FED might not necessarily translate into the interest rates in the economy as a whole, because concerns around the fiscal prospects might keep treasury rates higher. so how do you deal with with this risk of of transmission mechanism, alternative tools and and how do you, where do you focus in terms of of this interest transmission mechanism? uh, it's a great question. uh, underlying your question is a key concept for monetary policy makers, which is: where do we think the neutral policy stance is, which policy stance neither stimulates the economy nor restrains the economy? we don't know exactly where it is. we cannot measure it exactly. we can try to estimate it and we really know where it is only based on how the economy is responding to our policies. so the fact that we raiseed rates so aggressively and we didn't Crush demand in the US economy and didn't lead to high unemployment told me that the neutral rate in the US has probably gone up relative to where it was before the pandemic. so the analogy would be in: instead of pressing both feet on the brakes, maybe we were actually only pressing one foot on the brakes. now the big question mark is: so, in the first quarter of this year when inflation looked like it might be stalling out, it was Raising concerns in my mind: maybe policy is not as tight as we thought it was and might we need to do more. so we always left the door open that if we needed to take the policy rate higher, we could take the policy rate higher. but before we did that we said let's just give it more time and see if our current policy stance is enough to break through the floor, as you said. but in terms of now you get into, you know the the US government has is running large deficits. if you look at independent forecasts of US Government debt by the Congressional budget, the Congressional budget office, they just go up and up and up. what will happen if that materializes? likely it'll be more expensive for the US government to fund itself to borrow at higher rates and that means effectively, you could think of, our neutral rate will be higher. so instead of once we get through this pandemic reopening and we go back to whatever is normal, normal in that environment will likely be at a higher interest rate environment than normal before the pandemic. but there are enormous question marks about all of this and we're trying to feel our way as we go. I I have two more questions, um, one is complimentary to this one, uh, um, which has to do again with with transmission mechanisms. um, most of the discussions we've had in different forums about interest rate transmission mechanisms, other Central Bankers look at this, their impact of interest rates on dispos, on disposable income, and mainly through the mortgage Market. we don't have a mortgage Market in Argentina, um, so from that perspective, our transmission mechanism is quite uh, affected. it's quite weak. I wonder, um whether maybe in Spain, the speed at which the mortgage Market developed, or or or the timing- because the US has had a, a very welldeveloped mortgage market for a long time, whether that ever had a role or not, whether you could identify other transmission mechanisms for the interest rates. and I also wonder where, at the time of making monetary policy, there is a social angle to it. if you're affecting disposable income, should you as a policy maker, maintain an objective towards the social impact that that this might have? well, the, the, the reality is, in particular, compared to the to the US case, is that the of? because when analyzing the monetary transmission of um of monetary policy in in Europe, you have to take into account first that the, the main financing instruments of our households, but also of our firms, is is the banking sector. okay, uh, as compared to the US, on which the capital markets play a much, much higher role. and then, um, when you look in particular to to households, uh, in some countries- and Spain is one uh of, then a very significant part of the of the mortgages um are subject to variable interest rates. um, and I will link this also with this more social issue, know that you were raising Santiago at the end of the of the of the question um. what this makes is, of course, that any change in interest rates up, up or down, the transmission on on households is is very, is very significant, okay, for, at least for those that have a a mortgage at at variable, at variable rate um, and this creates a certain difficulty also within the European monetary Union, because, uh, Spain is at one extrem, our 75% of our households, those that have a morgage, are at variable uh rates, while in the case of Germany, for example, basically 100% of the mortgages are at fixed, a fix AIX rates. no, so it's a um, it creates an heterogenity on the, on the transmission of monetary policy within the, the, the monetary, the monetary Union and, of course, link to the last part of the question. it creates um also some uh difficulties in terms of the communication and, in particular, when you are subject to a netive supply sock at the one as the one that we've been facing, because, on the one hand, what you have is uh that households are suffering for the increasing in inflation, in particular, in this case, since it was food and energy, this was affecting even um uh low-income households more in relative terms to to rich people, if you want to, to put it this uh, this this way, and on top of it, you are increasing interest rates, uh, for very good reasons, for sure, in order precisely to to keep inflation expectations anchor um and uh. this is uh sometimes not very easy to to communicate and and for people to to to understand. so, no, it creates a challenge, but in my view, it cannot um um it, it cannot lead to a, to a policy conclusion that it is different to the one that is related to your, to your mandate. um, it creates a difficulty. that, again, I'm I'm stressing this point because it creates a difficulty, that it is heterogeneous across European European countries is more a difficulty in in Spain that in in Germany, in fact, in in Germany, you can even claim that four households as an, as an aggregate, the increasing rates has been even positive in terms of this possible income. uh. so well, uh, but we have again, we have to manage uh this communication problems in our own way. and, by the way, I think this is also why I think, um, that the fact that we still keep central banks that relatively powerful in within the system is is good. no, because then you can have the, the Spanish governor, as focusing very much on this very specific problem, which is a problem of of communication, that there still, even these heterogeneous effects, the decisions that taken by the ECB in commonly are the good ones for the, for the economy, um. so my final question, and a little bit forward looking as well: um, the current context in terms of monetary policy Frameworks, uh, is one where we never had so many countries imp implementing a, a uh such a similar structure, meaning inflation targeting, as the main policy framework for monetary policy across the world. at the same time, I don't think we've ever seen- definitely not, not in in this recent era- a situation where every country in the world is hit by the same shock with the co crisis. um. so what we saw was the most coordinated response to shocks from the policy side that we've ever seen. so the initial easing of monetary conditions was coordinated or not was correlated. and then, as inflation picked up, the different, the different- uh central banks started increasing rates, also in a quite coordinated fashion. and now we are at a new inflection point and I get the sense that that coordination that we saw, with rates coming down, down and then coming up, is starting to break up a little bit, because you know, as, as it comes to face different challenges in terms of economic performance, you start facing the differences between the structure of the economies and the mandates that they have. so the FED has a dual mandate: inflation and unemployment. while the ECB doesn't care about unemployment, they only- it only- cares about inflation. um, and the economic structure of of of the different geographies is different. one is more productive than the other one. one may be more focused on Goods, the other one on services. so that coordination it feels like it's going to start breaking up. so two PR question. one is: are you affected by at the time of defining monetary policy, are you affected by what's going on in the other geographies? does the FED. look at what's going on in Europe and and what could happen to currencies, trade and and other variables if this coordination is broken. and two, the world has changed in the last five years. uh, in terms of technological development, in terms of financial development, in terms of Lessons Learned, and and and and behaviors, so as as a as an example of what we observe here in Argentina, we have we've had a, we've gone through a cycle of demonetization of the economy between 2019 and 2024, and the economy is being remonetized, but with all these changes, we don't know where we're heading to. we don't know what the monetary base is going to be relative to GDP in the next two years, because we don't know if our historical parameters are relevant or not. so I wonder what type of challenges you feel you're facing in this new cycle at the time of making policy decisions, given the things that might have changed. what comes to my mind, for example, is: in the US, maybe the employment market dynamics have changed through the covid crisis and so your historical parameters don't necessarily apply this time around the, the fiscal front might be different. Europe has come up with a new set of rules because it it realized that it fa different challenges and the distribution of those challenges has also changed. in the past it was the, the, the- I don't know if poorer, but the pigs- for example, countries versus France. this time around, right, France and Germany, where do they stand? so what can you share about these two things? uh, well, first, we. we absolutely pay attention to what's happening in economies around the world because they affect the United States. ultimately, our char is to set monetary policy to achieve the goals that the Congress has assigned us. but the rest of the world affects us and so we care, we pay a lot of attention, we have a lot of dialogue. especially our folks in Washington have a lot of dialogue with our counterparts all around the world. so we definitely care, we definitely pay a lot of attention, but ultimately we have to set monetary policy for the US. I think you're right looking forward that there's going to be more heterogeneity of individual monetary policies of economies around the world, and I think that's a good thing. I think that mean that these Global shocks are Fading Into the background. right, the co shock, the supply chain shock, the war in Ukraine affecting commodity markets- these were all globally experienced phenomenon that. so it's not surprising That central banks would respond to those similarly, and you're also correct that the fundamentals of the economies are quite different, uh, and therefore their monetary policies should reflect that. to the open questions: uh, it's the ones that you said. what does the next 10 years look like? uh, you know, in the US- you, you mentioned covid- um, one of the things that's happened in the US is individuals demand for housing has gone up. you know, people moved somewhat outside of cities because they could work remotely, they were working from home, they wanted more space. uh, all of this maybe has CH led to a permanent shift in demand for housing, and home prices are a challenge all across the country. that home prices is are high. there's not enough Supply coming online. uh, a lot of American consumers are feeling the pressure of that. so, have those consumer preferences changed permanently? or have they changed and will they go? will they go back? and then what I mentioned about the neutral environment. now we think that what, what sets the neutral rate, are demographics and productivity development. well, demographics in America are pretty clear. our society is aging. it might shift with the change in Immigration, but it's basically on a, on a path you can see. and then productivity growth is an open question. you know what? what impact will AI have on productivity of economies around the world? I have no idea. um, I hope it's positive, I hope it. you know, I think social media was a productivity killer, so I'm hoping that AI is a productivity boost. um, you know, we'll see. but if productivity is boosted and there's a lot of places to invest and earn good Returns, the new neutral environment will go up and that will affect the sance of how policy is set as well. so there are big questions. you're facing them in Argentina, no doubt our colleagues in Europe are facing them, and we are facing them as well. yes, well, um, on the first part of the question, very similar to what the president kasari said, well, in our case, in the European case, you have to take into account that Europe is, um, the more open economy in the world, more even than than China. so this means that, uh, even if you, if you follow the, the, the typical pattern of a monetary policy decision, that you have a forecast provided by by the staff, and then you analyze all the, the race of the data and you take a decision- the first element of the discussion, which is the forecast- uh, when you have to provide a forecast for GDP and and inflation for the Euro area. one of the CR critical elements is, of course, what's happening with GDP growth um and there, for on imports and exports in, in in Europe and in the rest, as related to the rest of the of the of the world. um, I'm for sure the fact that, uh, we are now having more common shocks and Global shocks probably doesn't mean that we have to coordinate more explicitly our policies, um, because, just following our mandates, probably this implicit coordination that I was also mentioning between fiscal am monity is already happening between, between central banks, in, in any case, of course, there are always very good conversations in international institutions- IMF, bis, etc. etc. and we, we can share, uh all the information that it is needed precisely to to be sure that we take into account the decisions that we understand and we take into account the decisions that are taken by by by other, but, of course, respecing, respecting our mandate, which is a domestic, a domestic one. and then on the, on the second question, I mean, I think this: this is going to be the focus um, the, probably um in 2025, of most central banks, because I think the FED, but for sure the is B are entering into a review of the review of the monetary policy strategy- in our case, for example, the one that was published in 2021, and I guess one of the main um issues that the, the council uh will be- will be doing is, of course, taking a stock of what has happened during the during the last three, four years, but, at the same time, trying to incorporate um the analysis of new elements, and to me, there are at least three issues. I'm very much let it what has happened, but I I think, to certain extent, we will remain persistent in the future that will be relevant. the first one is that is the very high level of uncertainty that we are facing, that I don't see this Vanishing, and this has very clear, very strong implications for monetary policy decision. so, just to to give one one example, when the governing Council of DCB is now meeting, there is not anymore one only Central scenario of micro projections, but there are sensitivity analysis of uh many different socks that might happen, Okay, and then the staff basically identifies in each uh point in time what the the potential socks might be, and they they run their models and they show the council the potential implications and it is for the council to give um a certain probability also to these other non Central shocks and a scenario. this is a very different way to, to to take decisions as the one that we were having just a few years ago, the. the second is the, the prevalence of negative, negative Supply shocks. probably we Economist we have not paid sufficient attention in the past to supply shocks in more, more, more, more, more in general, um and uh, well, to certain extent, um we have learned also a lot during the last two, three years, um on the transmission of the shocks to the economy, the Persistence of this, of these shocks, and implications uh of of the effects on on monetary policy, and we have to take a stock of that and to to learn. and then SEC. and the third point is about the magnitude of the socks. um, again, I think in the last three years some nonlinearities uh were observed because the shocks were very significant, were very, very significant in terms of the pandemic, for example, but they were also very significant in terms of the energy shock and the food price shock. um, this um in in the European case, we have evidence, for example, that this affected how firms change their prices in a very high inflation. you you've been living in a very high inflation environment. probably we have to learn something from, from you, on how the economy, the agents, economic agents, firms and households behave in such a such a context and try to incorporate these nonlinearities um into the decision making process, just to mention a few, a few, a few of them. well, thank you very much. it's been extremely interesting. we we cannot express how much we appreciate you joining us and you share in this presentation today. we hope that you enjoy the rest of your stay and the rest of the panels. thank you very much. thank you much. [Music]. [Applause].