https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-qa-at-the-bank-holding-company-association-fall-seminar

Neel Kashkari Q&A at the Bank Holding Company Association Fall Seminar

October 7, 2024

Edina, Minnesota

Neel Kashkari

thanks, Tom. it's my honor to introduce Neil kashari. Neil kashari is president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, 9th District. Neil also serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets the nation's monetary policy. Neil began his career as an aerospace engineer developing technology for NASA space missions. he later held a variety of roles in public service and finance, most notably as assistant Secretary of the Treasury during the 2008 financial crisis, where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program. Neil lives with his wife, two young children and a Newland dog in Oro, Minnesota. welcome, Neil, thank you. appreciate you being here. great to be here, John, thank you. so I thought, um, I'd just start with a few opening comments about the Federal Reserve and the Minneapolis fed. this is a room full of Bankers, so you may all know this, uh, but you might not, and so I'll just give you a little bit of context. uh, there's something unique about our nation Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, which is in 1913. when Congress designed it, they wanted to make sure that all the different regions of our country had a direct voice in the policy process, so they distributed it all around the country, so you're familiar with the Board of Governors in Washington, the chair of the Federal Reserve board is Jerome Powell. before Jerome was Janny Ellen and Ben banki and Alan Greenspan. and then there are 12 independent federal reserve banks spread out around the country, the ninth of which is here, the Minneapolis fed, and our jobs are to represent this region in that policy process. and this region- The Ninth District- is Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, the Upper Peninsula, Michigan and Northwestern Wisconsin. so a big part of my job and my colleagues jobs are to travel around our region and get to know what is happening here in our regional economy. and then when I go back to Washington DC every six weeks for fomc meetings, part of what I'm doing in those meetings is talking about what's happening here in our regional economy. now we all use the same dollar across the country so we can't have a different interest rate, a different monetary policy for Minnesota and for California and New York. it's one monetary policy for the nation. but what I'm doing in those meetings is I'm talking about making a recommendation for what I think and what my colleagues and I at the Minneapolis fed think is optimal for the United States as a whole. but it is informed in part by what we're hearing all across our region. you know, we get a lot of economic data and a lot of times that economic data is sending us mixed signals. so how do you make sense, how do I make sense of those mixed signals? a lot of times, it's conversations like this that can help me understand what are. what are Business Leaders seeing on the ground in our region? you know, is the economy heating up? is it cooling down? the data might be conflicting, but a lot of times these types of conversations can help us make sense, and so I'm excited for our Q&A. I'm excited to hear from you, and the more direct you are with me, the more I'm going to be able to learn from you. so I'm here to answer your questions, but I'm I'm also here to hear from you and learn from you, which is going to help me think about monetary policy going forward. so I really appreciate the opportunity to be here with all of you. great thanks for those insights, Neil and uh. let me begin with a few questions and then we'll open up to the audience and then we'll have kind of a trade between the audience and up here. first, let's start with the elephant in the room. in the September 26, the fomc voted to raise the FED funds Target rate by 50 basis points and lower it. I'm we're so used to hearing saying raise, thank you. yeah ordered to lower the FED fund star rate by 50 basis points. were you in favor of the move or did you think higher or lower? well, give us some insight into your thinking. sure I did support the move, you know over the past. first of all, back up for a second. the last three years has been incredibly difficult to forecast the economy. we were- I was, we were- surprised that the inflation went as high as it did and was as persistent as it was. you might recall, we called it and I called it transitory until we said, okay, that doesn't work anymore, it's not transitory. but then we were equally surprised by how rapidly it came back down. now, prices didn't come down, but the inflation rate came back down. so we raised rates, inflation came back down and wonderfully, at least so far, the economy has been very robust, even though interest rates went up so high. you know, traditionally when the Federal Reserve raises interest rates aggressively to bring inflation down, that slows the economy quite dramatically and can lead to a recession. so far that has not happened and the labor market has been very resilient. so there's every step of the way, we've been surprised. at the early part of this year, what you know go back to the very beginning of this year. it looked like we had conquered inflation and markets were pricing in 7- 25 basis point Cuts this year. then, the first quarter of this year, inflation surprised us. it was stickier than we had thought and we thought, well, maybe the disinflationary process is stalled. so then we paused, and then it turned out that the disinflation is continuing. and so now we've said, yes, we can resume with our uh planning to normalize monetary policy. this is a long wordy answer to say. I supported the decision because we've made a lot of progress on inflation and because the labor market has shown some signs of weakening, and historically, when the labor market weakens a little bit, it tends to weaken by a lot, and we don't want the labor market to weaken by a lot. so I- I just describe it this way- the balance of risks have shifted away from high inflation towards maybe higher unemployment, and that's why I thought dialing back policy was the right move. I could have supported 25 or 50 basis points. at the end of the day, the the Judgment was that 50 basis points was the right move and I supported that great. can you give us your assessment of the overall economy and across the country and what gives you hope right now and what would give you concern? well, overall, the economy, as I just mentioned, is proven to be remarkably resilient. even the job report that we got last week exceeded virtually everybody's expectations in terms of job growth, the unemployment rate ticking back down to 4.1%- almost 4.0%, just depending on how the rounding works out. uh, so it looks like it's still a strong labor market, which is really good news. we want to keep a strong labor market and, as I said a moment ago, traditionally when the Federal Reserve is raiseed rates aggressively, that Taps the breakes on the economy and that usually manifests in weakness in the labor market and it could be a big increase in unemployment. thankfully, we have not seen that. so that is a really good fact that the job market has stayed strong while inflation has come down. so we want that to continue. but there are always risks on the horizon, you know. one risk is that maybe we know monetary policy works with a lag, so we adjust interest rates. maybe it takes a year or two for the effects to be fully felt. well, maybe all that tightening we did a couple years ago, maybe that's still on the pipeline and we're only going to now feel the effects of that. I can't rule that out, but I'm not seeing much evidence for that. another risk is, maybe inflation is going to surprise us and start climbing again. you know, when we slice inflation into its underlying components it looks quite positive Goods inflation- you know the, the goods that you and I buy. before the pandemic it was traditionally a little bit less than zero because we buy stuff from abroad. there's productivity gains in manufacturing. so actually Goods inflation is negative. it's back to negative. so we're back on the good side. Services inflation is trending down and it's closely tied to wages and wages have been moving generally in the right direction. which left is housing inflation, now housing inflation. we think we have a lot of confidence that housing inflation should continue to Trend down because we can look at new rents. so, for example, if you went out and rented an apartment today, new rental inflation is way down. that takes 12 to 24 months to roll over into housing inflation. so we think we have a lot of confidence that inflation should be on its way back down to our 2% Target. so I can't rule out any of these risks, you know. could the labor market weaken more than we expect? it's possible. could inflation flare back up again? it's possible. but we're not seeing signs of this and I can assure you- we are looking every different way we can- any differences in the Upper Midwest, in the Ninth District, versus the rest of the country. you know the Ninth District. one of the neat things that I observed when I first moved here, almost I guess, nine years ago, is that it really looks a lot like the United States as a whole. most major sectors of the US economy are represented here, whether it's manufacturing and agriculture, energy in the North Dakota region, Health Care, uh, Financial Services- they're all represented here, and so if any one sector is down, you know sectors go up, sectors go down. if anyone's sector is down, we generally benefit because the rest of the economy is probably doing okay, and so overall we look a lot like the United States as a whole. on average we have lower unemployment. I think structurally we tend to have lower Unemployment uh than the us as a whole. we do right now in Minnesota as well, and I think most businesses that I talk to feel like we just structurally, are in need of more people to fill jobs, whether it's Farm Workers to work on farms or in Services Industries, Etc or high-tech. so I think we look a lot like the us, but we have a little bit lower unemployment over on average here. I want to turn to a sector that's um made a lot of headlines lately, and that's the commercial real estate sector. commercial real estate lending is an integral part of the community banking Arena. today. there's a lot of variances among sectors as well as areas in commercial real estate. what are you watching at C? yeah, what you just said is exactly right: there's a lot of the. the term CR captures a very wide type of lending and type of activities. real estate activities. obviously, the office sector is the one that I think most people are paying closest attention to. it's under the most stress in, uh, Urban centers all around the country, for obvious reasons that we're all aware of, and I think the the shoes to drop from that have not yet fully dropped. so we're watching, we're trying to figure out which banks do we think are most exposed or which insurance companies might be most exposed. are there concentrations that we are particularly worried about? we're looking again, we're looking very carefully, we're not seeing any evidence of a systemic risk. but, uh, could there be individual institutions that face big exposures? I think the answer has to be yes, and usually either those institutions or The Regulators, or both, end up being surprised. you know how acute those stresses can become, and so I remember this from 08. we were trying to understand exactly where with the mortgage Market- where the where do these losses lie, and there were many, many surprises uh, until it all became clear in including abroad. it would not surprise me at all if there are institutions abroad that have some big office commercial real estate exposure here in the US, and so I think that's where most of our attention is in terms of risks. uh, but you know, we have. we have Bank supervisors who try to look all the way across it. we have Financial stability experts who look all across these categ as well. in 2008, you played a crucial role uh with the Treasury under Hank Paulson. uh, could you share an Insight or a story uh that maybe people haven't heard? um, it's hard to know uh, what what folks have heard? um, somebody told me that there's a play in Minneapolis. my colleague told me there's a play in Minneapolis on Leman Brothers right now, which I didn't know. they made a play about Leman brothers. that's fascinating. um, so the weekend of Leeman Brothers weekend, uh was- was extraordinary, because every step of the 08 crisis we thought, okay, this is as bad as it can get, so go back. Leman Brothers was September 08. earlier March of '08 was When U Bear Sterns failed and i' had been in New York for Bear Sterns weekend and I was shuttling around between be Sterns and JP Morgan, who acquired be Sterns and the New York fed. be Sterns was resolved over a weekend and we thought, okay, maybe this is it, maybe this was the shoe that was to drop. and then things got a little bit better and then Markets started turning South again and over the summer, uh, the treasury, with with other Regulators, took over Fanny and Freddy and effectively nationalized Franny and Freddy. they we thought, okay, this is a massive intervention, maybe this is finally the the last shoe to drop. and then, of course, Leman brothers. and then the Cascade that followed. I I guess I don't have any one story to tell other than it felt like we were at War, the economic equivalent of War. every, every time we got through another day, we thought, okay, maybe we're now at the worst of it, and then it got worse and worse and worse, and then, finally, what ended up quelling the crisis was- I mean, it wasn't one moment- but was when the tarp Authority was passed. that gave the government the ability to put Equity Capital into Banks- maybe many of your Banks as well, uh, all across the country. that was an absolutely necessary U medicine, so to speak, to give people confidence that the financial sector could endure the crisis that was unfolding. it's not one story. I've got a million stories, but, um, maybe in Q&A people can can ask more specifics. great many worry about the debt, though few consider inflation, population GDP and tax receipts. are people's concerns warranted or misguided? and how do you view the debt? well, the debts a big, complicated question. first of all, it's not the fed's job. it's congress's job and the executive branch um, so I'm not going to Pine on any current political debates about taxes or spending. that's up to our elected leaders. but if you just look at a forecast, go to the Congressional budget office, which is the nonpartisan team of economists that forecast the budget for the US Congress. if you just look at their forecast for the next 20 or 30 years, the debt just goes to the moon. so that clearly cannot happen. something has to give, and either, if they tried to issue that much debt, what would probably happen is inflation would take off, the FED would raise rates, treasury borrowing costs would go up, and then that would crowd out other spending. and then something would have to give. politically, it' have to make other choices. um, or they'd end up cutting spending, or they'd end up raising taxes, or some combination of all three of those. and so, if you just look at the forecast, it can't happen what is forecast in current law. somehow our political system has to come together to make tradeoffs to find balance. now the challenge is: nobody knows where the red zone is, you know, uh, many countries have gotten into a lot of trouble with less debt to GDP than we have, so that's kind of scary. on the other hand, Japan has twice as much debt to GDP has, and they have no trouble financing themselves at very low rates. and so are we more like Japan, or are we more like some of these other countries? you know, I think reasonable people can disagree on which one we, which dimensions of which of those countries we look like. and so we, we do know that this needs to be addressed and ultimately needs to be addressed by the American people through their elected representatives. it's not the Federal Reserve. we don't have the tools to address. it's not our job, um, and so it's a challenge interesting, but the last thing I'll just say is: ultimately, if you look around the world, investors have more confidence, despite all of our flaws. uh, investors have more confidence in investing in America than any other Advanced economy by a mile, and I share their confidence in the US economy and our competitiveness. so we have tremendous Assets in our favor. now we just need to come together and make some decisions there. excellent, let's open it up to questions from the audience and just you know we're please do speak into the microphone, because we're live streaming this, and so I want to make sure the world can hear your question. anyone have a question right here and right here. uh, what is your opinion on um, cyber currency and AI as potential threats to the banking industry? so cyber currency, you mean like crypto currency or, yeah, yeah, crypto, um and AI, I mean I view those things as very different. um, crypto I've been very vocal about, is I'm quite skeptical of. because, let me ask, let me back up. AI generative AI is only a few years old. let me just do an experiment: how many of you, how many of you, have used AI in the last month? I see most hands are up in the room. I have. I've used it yesterday. okay, how many of you have bought or sold something using Bitcoin? bought or sold something using Bitcoin? what did you buy, sir? I owed somebody some money, I owed somebody funds and I just transferred them crypto. so you, okay, have you bought or have you used it as a to as a transaction? no, I guess I haven't. to purchase. no, so here's. here's what I'm getting at. AI generative AI is very new and every day, people are innovating actual uses that you and I find useful in our daily lives. Bitcoin is more than a dozen years old and the enthusiasts are desperate to find some use case other than subverting banking regulation, and nobody's been able to come up with it. the only use cases is either speculating on bitcoin itself or subvert like. I met somebody who said that he was sending money to Ukraine. I tried to understand: what do you? finally, I realized he was sending weapons to Ukraine and he was funding it because he couldn't send it through his bank, so he had to do it using crypto. so it's a long answer to your question, which is: I've grown deeply, deeply skeptical that after a Dozen Years nobody can find a real legal use case for Bitcoin that the traditional banking sector cannot address, cannot solve. so Bitcoin crypto- uh, I'm deeply skeptical of a. I am deeply enthusiastic because every day, people are innovating new things. now might there be abuses, might there be mistakes that come from it. sure, just like with any kind of innovation, but so far I mean I I was. I don't even remember what I was Googling yesterday. I was Googling something yesterday and I wasn't getting exactly what I wanted. so I went into chat GPT and I asked it the same question and it actually curated the answer that I was intending to search for. now I could have done that on my own, but it would have been five steps for me to do it using Google and it did it in one step, step using chat GPT. so I'm excited and optimistic about AI. I recognize there might be problems that come along with it. we're going to learn. um, I'm deeply skeptical at this point about cryptocurrency. on the AI, I want to say that Google has an app called Gemini. if anybody has found it, just search Gemini and go right to the Google Website and you can get a just like that, a curated answer. I use Gemini about five times a day. it's absolutely amazing. next question: uh, question for you, Neil. uh, um, the Federal Reserve here has been a big Advocate. your Federal Reserve in Minneapolis has been a big advocate for education and, uh, you and Alan paage wrote a nice piece advocating for that. um, and this isn't a criticism, but how does that fit into the charter of the Federal Reserve and do you worry that it might impact the independence of the Federal Reserve, as politicians start perceiving you getting into the public policy field, which is their business, and may feel like they should get more involved with the Federal Reserve then, as a result, great question. so the Minneapolis fed actually, for 20 plus years, has done research, maybe 25 years, has done research on education, specifically focusing on the economic return to early childhood education, and so people asked 25 years ago, why would the Minneapolis fed look at this? and we look at it through the lens of we have a dual mandate that we always talk about stable prices and maximum employment. so there's a lot, lot of research that's being done all around the Federal Reserve trying to understand what are the drivers of Maximum employment, what do maximum employment even mean? what are the drivers of Maximum employment? and you're right, we don't set education policy at the Federal Reserve, but we feel if we can do nonpartisan, dispassionate research on important topics, then other elected leaders may choose to pick it up or may not, and so it's up to them if they want to pick it up or not. um, as one example, I'll give you another example of some research that we're doing. the cities of Minneapolis and St Paul voted increase the minimum wage several years ago to $15 an hour. well, the cities came to the Minneapolis fed and said: would you research the economic impact? we've already made the decision to do it. it's already in law. but this is a contentious issue where labor Community is on one side, the business Community is the other side. they came to us because they said: hey, we think you're the only research group that everybody will trust to do the analysis honestly. so we then went to the state legislature and said: hey, we've been asked to do this, but to do it properly we need to access to confidential State taxpayer data. and the state legislature said: we agree and we're going to give you access- that you have to protect- to this data so you can do the analysis honestly. so we're doing research, multi-year research study, on what is the effect of raising the minimum wage in that example. we're not saying raising the minimum wage is a good idea or a bad idea. we're simply saying what are the effects of having of the Cities having decided to raise minimum wage? so it's a long answer to say we do a lot of research on important economic topics that we don't control and we don't influence, but we say, hey, if we have research expertise and can bring it to Bear, uh, then we're going to do so. and the gentleman like to follow up, please? you didn't answer the second part of my question, but the first part was you actually came out in 2020 and advocated for a con Constitutional Amendment. so that- and I'm not trying to argue here, I'm just saying that goes beyond just research, that's public policy, that's advocating a position in government which, like I said again, is not in the charter of the Federal Reserve. so I, I, just I, I worry that the independence of the Federal Reserve is going to be hurt by taking public policy issues. like I said, the research is great, but then going ahead and advocating for a position like a constitutional amendment is a public policy decision that politicians, the voter, should make, not the Federal Reserve. yeah, and, and, and, and. you're right. ultimately it's up to the state legislature to decide whether or not to take that forward and up to the voters whether or not to take that forward. and you're absolutely right on the on that, on that point, uh- and some people push back on us- by the way, just so you know we're going to continue the discussion- some people push back on us and say you shouldn't even do the research. and so you know, ultimately it's a judgment call on what do we think is appropriate, what do we think is within our mandate. I'll give you one more example. uh, our bank has not done anything on climate change, even though I I believe climate change is an important economic issue fac in the country, and the reason that we have not taken on climate change as an issue is it is not obvious to me that we have any special expertise on this topic. and so if we don't have any special expertise on this topic, then why are we, why is the Minneapolis fed going to get involved? the one around the labor market. I do think we have relevant expertise to bring to bear and that's why we uh explored it. next question: thank you, hi um, you started out your career as a aerospace engineer and, uh, I started out my career as an historian- a very little spillover in my career. but I'm wondering: in yours, what, what do you see as helped or maybe been in irrelevant or have has hindered you know your subsequent career? uh, at the FED, I actually think, um, thanks for your question. uh, so I I done my bachelor's and Masters in mechanical engineering and I worked in Aerospace for about three years on naso missions, just as John said, before going back to business school and then going to finance and then banking. uh, I actually think my engineering training has has been more valuable than my MBA, uh, in working at the fed. and the reason is this: ultimately, what engineer? what makes an engineer engineer? it is problem solving. you know you have a problem, you have to analyze the problem. you have certain tools. how do you bring these tools to address the problem that you've identified? so, the irrelevant part: I'm not using thermodynamics or fluid dynamics in my work at the FED, but the raw toolkit of an analytical skills and problem solving is absolutely relevant to any range of things, whether it's economic topics or uh space missions in NASA, and so I I actually think my engineering training has been uh foundational for me and I use it all the time. another question: hi, Neil, good to see you, good to see you. I want to Circle back to the commercial real estate State and- and I appreciate you characterizing it- is very wide ranging and you guys being so concerned about sort of metropolitan areas and office space and things like that, as a real world Community Banker, uh, on Main Street, that specializes in small business lending, we do a lot of it and you know, oftentimes we find ourselves- and I'm sure there's plenty of people in the room- that find themselves in excess of the supervisory letter of 300% of capital, and I talk with your staff about this all the time. like my CR is not the CR you're talking about. I'm not financing IDs, buildings and you know office Towers. you know we're doing small businesses. often times it's single use type properties, multi-generational, and I just wonder if you'd talk a little bit about the difference between those two and if there's any plans from a regulatory standpoint for the Federal Reserve System and the Ninth District, to start differentiating between those two, because the, the kind of CRA that most of the people in this room participate in are, is not the same as the C that the Federal Reserve talks about more broadly through its supervisory letters and, and even in the Outreach events that you guys host. well, I would say I appreciate your comment. I would say, you know, we want our bank uh examiners to be in dialogue with the banks that they're supervising, to understand and go under the cover, look look at what these act- actual loans are, what these assorts are, to understand the risks associated with it. and so, uh, I don't have any more specific comments than to say: you know, do what you're doing, which is have those open conversations and, um, and if you need to raise things up the flag pole, raise things up the flag pole. I'm not saying you're going to get a better, more satisfying answer, but we do want people to be looking under the covers, talking to the banks that they're examining, uh, really trying to understand, and not just, you know, payt everybody with the broad brush. but I will say this: this is nothing about your bank. um, one of the things- this is my ninth year at the fed. the most common comment that I hear from Bankers is: we're very conservative, but you wouldn't believe what the other banks in my, my district are doing. okay, every Bank says that, every bank, and so you know we take, we take the feedback. we want to look underneath the covers to actually judge for ourselves. another question, Neil, speaking of conservative: the fed's balance sheet, I think, was 800 billion in 2008. I think it was 3.5 trillion in 2013. I think it got as high as 11 trillion. in covid today it's around N9 trillion. where, where do you in your, your, your, fellow, uh, fed presidents and and governors, where do you see the balance sheet going eventually? well, um, smaller than it is today? you know we're we've been shrinking the balance sheet now for the last year or so. we've actually shrunk it quite a bit. we're the only major Central Bank in the world after the' 08 crisis that actually shrunk its balance sheet. other balance sheets went up and just stayed up. we actually shrank it. uh, if you might recall, in the fall of 2019, we shrank it so far that there ended up being some scarcity of reserves and you saw spikes in money market rates- um, short-term rates that caused us to have to step back in. so the balance sheet is going to continue to grow over time, partially as, uh, the demand for reserves grows over time for a variety of different factors. it could be preferences in a banking sector for how many reserves Banks want to hold. it could be the fact that demand for dollars all around the world continues to increase, and so there are a bunch of structural reasons why the balance sheet is going to Trend up over time. we're now shrinking it. we're not going to shrink it back to the where it was prior to co, but we are shrinking it. it has a ways to go yet and then ultimately, it'll get on a growth path again, and there's nothing nefarious about that or spooky about that. it's just growing as demand for reserves, uh, as demand for reserves continues to grow, and so you know it's complicated- we- I thought that in 2019 that the balance sheet could shrink further. you know, one of the things we do is we'll survey Banks and we'll say, uh, what are their demand for Reserve reses? how many reserves do banks want to hold for their own liquidity needs? and it turns out Banks wanted to hold more reserves than they even admitted that they wanted to hold. I thought they were being conservative. I thought Banks were saying we want X. they really need less than that. turns out they needed more than that, and that's why, in the fall of 2019, we actually Shrunk the balance sheet a little bit too far and had to step back in and start growing the balance sheet again, and so this is a it's is an imperfect science. to know exactly what the right amount is is uh, but we have a ways to go. we're going to get there. hopefully, we're going to avoid that kind of volatility that we saw in 2019, and then it's going to start to grow again, just as the economy continues to grow. for lack of a better expression, I want to ask- ask a followup question on the balance sheet. so you've said in uh prior interviews the FED has four principal tools: the balance sheet, the perception of the balance sheet, uh, interest rate policy and perception. so how do those all Stack Up and see any as being more important than others in current times? so it's um, let me repeat what you just said. so I've always described it as though we have four primary tools: the federal fund rate that we move up and down. that's the thing that we reduced 50 basis points at our last meeting. we have the balance sheet, which we were just talking about, and we expanded the balance sheet to provide more stimulus once we had hit the zero lower bound. then we have the expected path of the federal funds rate and the expected path of our balance sheet. so in a s, i mean they're four related, but they're four in a way, distinct tools that all work either together or potentially across purposes with each other. we try to use them in a manner that works together. so the FED now has a lot of credibility with investors that we're committed to our dual mandate goals, that we're committed to getting inflation back down, that we're committed to 2% inflation as the Target. and so, because we have that credibility, it turns out the forward guidance tools are very powerful. and what's my proof of this? my proof of this is that we didn't start raising interest rates until March of- I'm gonna get this wrong- 2022, or is it Anyway, 21 or 22? right, but we started talking differently by November of the prior year. we started changing our forward guidance six months earlier and you saw the mortgage Market adjust dramatically after we Chang our forward guidance. that's an example where we had not yet adjusted our policy rate, but the mere fact that we were signaling that we're changing our path for the future dramatically changed financial markets. and so that's the power of our forward guidance. once you have this kind of credibility with the investing Community, you can actually have dramatic changes in financial conditions just based on our guidance, without actually moving the policy rate or without actually adjusting the balance sheet, and that's a great. that's an example of that. um. similarly, if you look most recently, the expectations were a few weeks before the meeting it was going to be a 25 basis point cut and then by the time of the meeting it became a 50 basis point cut. the repricing took place in those two week period, so there wasn't much of an imprint on financial markets after we actually cut because the action had already happened. and so now it turns out our guidance is really, really important. but then you have to follow through right to validate that. you have to validate that guidance to say, Hey, you were right to trust us. now we're going to walk the walk that we promised you, and so it ends up that they're both important. another question about monetary policy: considering the interest rate parts of monetary policy- interest, interest on reserve balances, fed funds, Target rates. how important is prevailing short-term interest rates to where you're going to set those rates? well, ultimately we're trying to affect the the suite of short-term interest rates. we want them to move more or less together. if just move the federal funds rate but no other short-term rate moved with it, then it wouldn't be a very effective transmission of our policy stance to the broader economy. and so we have a bunch of different tools: interest on reserve balances that you talked about, the something called the overnight reverse repo, Mark uh tool, which is all about getting money markets in alignment. so this basket of tools that we have are designed because of the complexity of the US Financial system, and so when we move our policy, when the fomc makes a policy decision, we want the suite of short-term rates to move in lock dep, and that's why we have these various tools to make sure that they all move together. let's go to some more questions. at uh last week's vice presidential debate, uh, one of the candidates, who doesn't happen to be from Minnesota, asserted on more than one occasion that there's a positive correlation between housing inflation and illegal immigration. does the fed's data back that assertion up at all? so I have um written about this. I have an essay from a few months ago where I made this comment H. we were looking at what are the. I was looking at what are the different sources of housing inflation and why is housing inflation taken off so much? one of the big sources of housing inflation is simply that for the last 15 years we built too few units in our country. after the financial crisis, we been underbuilding all around the country. uh, another source of housing inflation is that Supply chains were gummed up and so it got. even if you wanted to build, it got very expensive to build and they were labor shortages at the same time. another source of housing inflation has been that when the pandemic hit, people's preferences for housing as a consumable went up. meaning if you were working from home, maybe now you and your family said we need a bigger house. or people didn't want to be, uh, in downtown centers anymore. they wanted to be out in the suburbs, so demand for those suburban homes went up. so a bunch of preferences change in the pandemic. that led to more demand for housing, and I also speculated that, hey, one thing we know is that more people means more people needing a place to live, and so I just use logic to say: if you have more people in the country on the margin, that means you're going to have more demand for housing, all else being equal, and so I have not seen any more detailed analysis other than that type of logical deduction: that more people means more demand for housing. um, and that, anyway, that was the basis of my comment when I made that comment a few months ago. another question, thank you. um, since the um Bank collapses in 23, there's um been a lot of discussion relative to the discount window and the use of things like the Federal Home Loan Bank. my sense is that that's a continuing conversation that's driving us as Banks to look more, um uh, toward the discount window for liquidity needs. my question of you is that: um, do you see The, the feder Reserve Banks, wanting to get into um, the, maybe the immediate liquidity business such as somebody like the home loan bank has, or are we still to look at it more as the emergency resource that it always had been thought of in the past? yeah, I don't. I mean I don't want to speak for anybody else, but I haven't heard anybody say that we want the FED to be, for example, competing with the home loan Banks, uh, or trying to take market share from the home loan banks? that, um, again, I've never heard anybody suggest that. uh, we do know. I mentioned earlier, when we were shrinking the balance sheet in um 2019, that we went a little bit too far, and one of the interesting things that happened happened when We Shrunk the balance sheet a little bit too far is there were federal funds rate trades at rates well in excess of what was available at the discount window. so, in theory, that shouldn't happen. like, why is it that somebody would go to another bank and say: I want to borrow fed funds from you at this very high rate when the discount window is here and I could pledge an asset and get funding at a lower rate? so that's a. that's a Oddity that, logically, one I wouldn't think would take place. and so, um, I think a lot of my colleagues and I are looking at a lot of different things to understand. are there structural barriers that prevent people who would otherwise, in a moment, want to access the discount window from accessing it? for example, when Silicon Valley Bank got into trouble, one of the things we learned is there were a bunch of banks who, in theory, would like to have been able to tap the discount window but weren't prepared to do so. either they didn't have the legal documentation in place or they didn't have the collateral available, or some cases, they didn't know where collateral was. uh, a bunch of things that, again, you wouldn't think of would be real barriers but in the moment ended up being real barriers. so one of the things we've been doing is trying to encourage all the banks to make sure that they are prepared, if they choose to, that they are prepared to actually access the discount window, that they have collateral available, that they know where it is, that they're in a position to pledge it so that they can access it if they need it. so, at a minimum, we want to make sure that those hiccups and those barriers are eliminated and then, if there other things that we can do to improve things, you know we want to consider that too. next question: thank you for coming today. I appreciate it along those lines. to follow up on Bob's question regarding the liquidity, the discount window, the FED- I believe it was in the late 22, early 23- they offered the bank term funding and I'm guessing quite a number of dollars will be coming back, paid back to the fed by the end of November of this year. has the FED looked at any different product to extend those or offer similar type funding, or are it relying more? going back to the discount window? yeah, I don't. I don't know if anybody considering having something like that as a ongoing product? um, you know, normally we are lending against market value of Securities and loans, and what was powerful about the btfp was that we were lending against par value, and you know that's a that's pretty extraordinary thing to do at a moment of Crisis. one of the things the FED has gotten very good at- For Better or Worse- is responding to these acute events with custom tailored solutions that are designed specifically for that. uh, and so that's that's what revealed itself when Silicon Valley Bank got into trouble: that it was that mismatch between Book value and market value and people's perception of what it meant for their Capital position and their ability to meet their fund uh, any kind of request from their customers, and so, um, I don't anticipate that being any kind of Standalone or ongoing facility. uh, and hopefully we can make the discount window effective in most situations for banks that are otherwise healthy. Gan, back here, had a question. yeah, thank you. uh Curious, Neil, and your perspective on the Central Bank digital currency and how that would benefit Community Banks, because to many of us, that would be another foreign currency that we money would flow to. so what are your thoughts about that? well, I'm- uh, just as I've grown quite skeptical of Bitcoin, I'm also skeptical, so far, of the value of a central bank digital currency. uh, The Advocates speculate that maybe it would be better for financial inclusion or maybe it would reduce the cost of, for example, crossborder remittances. I haven't seen any evidence that it does either of those things. I'm not saying it's impossible, but I haven't seen any evidence that it does any of those things. um, and so you know, let's see. let's see what actual problem this is trying to solve. one of my observations is: the private financial sector has actually come up with really remarkable innovations that meet most of our customers needs. you know, I always talk to people I say I could send anybody five dollar right now, anybody in this room. I can send five dollars right now using, say, venmo or fed now, if you have fed now, or zel or PayPal. I mean, some of those venmo- PayPal are built on the old Legacy systems, but they built a front end that solves most of our um needs as consumers. and so what actually is it that this Central Bank digital currency can solve? uh, I'm just, I'm waiting, I'm I'm asking people and you know people are studying it, but I haven't seen any evidence that it actually addresses the issues that The Advocates say that it addresses. other question. so, Neil, one of the big problems with the banks today is the aoci and the bond portfolio deterioration. you know, liquidity is equal to book value or higher, you know, and anything else is a loss. um, the inverted. we talk about rates, but it's really the inverted yield curve. if the yield curve could just get more normalized, uh, I think that would alleviate a lot of the problems, because as we burn off duration and the rates are higher, it just we can't win. what can the FED do to try and get to a more normalized shaped yield curve and can we order one up please? great question, how about? you just asked me: when is the Fed going to lower rates? right, you just come out and say it. uh, you know what's funny that? so the yield curve is UN inverting. right before I I came in this, I looked in the TV this morning. I think the two-year was around 4%. the 10 year was about 4%, so it's it's uninverted um. it can un invert a few ways. it can un invert by the FED bringing the front end down, and it can unvert by the long end going up. and the big question mark that we haven't talked about is where are rates ultimately going to settle, like what is neutral? and there's huge uncertainty, in my mind at least, about what neutral is. before the pandemic, I thought a neutral federal funds rate was around 2%. uh, around zero Z real um, and I think it's gone up. I I penciled in my last SCP summer of economic projections closer to 3%. and here's the thing: the longer the economy keeps exceeding expectations, with what seems like a tight interest rate policy and the job market stays strong, which is great, and consumption stay strong and GDP stays strong, the more I think, well, maybe we're not that tight and maybe therefore, we're not going to go down as far, and so maybe that long end of the curve isn't going to, maybe it's going to go up, or maybe it'll stay flat, maybe it's not going to drop from here, and so it's a. it's a wordy answer to say there's a bunch of different ways the yield curve can. uninverted federal funds rate is part of it, but where that backend ends up is a big question mark in my mind. I have a question: as a Central Bank, the FED is the Bank of the United States government, yet you're independent. do you work ksy with the treasury and collaborate often or completely independent? how does that relationship work? it's a a complicated relationship. by law, the Federal Reserve is What's called the Fiscal Agent for the US Treasury. so you know, the treasury issues all of this, all this debt, to the public. well, they do that through the New York fed and the New York fed does it on behalf of the treasury, taking instruction from the treasury. but the treasury doesn't have Bond Traders and computer systems that do all that the New York fed does. so the New York fed does that, for example, on behalf of the treasury. if, if you have a savings bond that maybe you bought for one of your kids or your mom or dad bought and it's time to redeem it and you pick up the phone to redeem the savings bond, there's a good chance you're going to get somebody at the Minneapolis fed who answers that phone on behalf of the US Treasury. so there's a bunch of stuff that the Federal Reserve Banks do on behalf of the US Treasury as Fiscal Agent for the US Treasury. now that's completely separate from monetary policy. now monetary policy is independent, but there are times when there has been some coordination and that coordination has been appropriate. so in the o08 crisis, Treasury and the Federal Reserve work very closely together to try to Stave off the worst of the 08 financial crisis and in Co, the treasury and the fed and we- we did it at those times because it actually supported us achieving our dual mandate goals. so in 08 and in covid, we faced very high unemployment, we faced a cratering economy and potentially- uh, even in those moments- deflation, and in those moments it made sense to work together to try to stabilize the economy, to keep the unemployment rate from going too high and to keep the economy from falling off a cliff. so there are times in crisis where it makes sense to coordinate, but those times are it's not in conflict with our dual mandate goals. it's actually in support of us achieving our dual mandate goals. we got time for one or two more questions. you know I'd like to ask a question. uh, Mr kosari, when you first came to Minneapolis, you put a lot of effort into studying too big to fail. it was a pretty major effort. just curious if you want to comment on that now that, uh, eight years have gone by since the results of that came out, but do you? uh, maybe you could just summarize what the what the study showed and whether you stand by those results. I know that for Community Banks, the cost of capital has been proven to be higher than it is for the very largest bank, so I think this is a very important issue for the folks in this room and I'm wondering about your thoughts. yeah, we did just as you said. we did a lot of work on the issue of two big def fail banks. at the Minneapolis fed, we concluded that the biggest banks need a lot more Capital to address the risk that they are uh posing for the economy as a whole. you know, if a Community Bank gets into trouble, you know we don't want that to happen, but it's not going to bring down the US economy. if a giant Bank gets into trouble, it could bring down the US economy, and so the risks are just very different for the American people as a whole. and, as you all know, Community Banks generally have more Capital- higher Capital rates than the biggest banks, which is the opposite of what logic would suggest it should be. having said that, so we stand by those results. we think those results are correct, uh, that the biggest banks need a lot more Capital. there doesn't appear to be much political appetite for that, and so, you know, there was a bosel 3 proposal that the Board of Governors put forward. um, that, in my view, modestly raised the capital requirements on the largest banks, and there was great push back across the political Spectrum from that, and they're now coming forward with a, a revised proposal. and so I mean, at the end of the day, uh, these judgments have to be made by the public through their elected representatives, and, um, there just doesn't seem to be appetite for addressing this issue. so, um, it's not where I would, how I would have it, but it is what it is. one more question, and then I have one more. anyone right here, hold on, there's a, there's a microphone coming to you. Governor Bowman's descent was a big deal to a lot of us. first time a governor, I think, descended in 19 years. um, talk to me a little bit about what you expect with the FED voting block changing next year. will it be a more doish, hawkish B? oh, I don't, I don't know um everybody. one of the things that's nice is everybody comes to the meeting having done their work, really studied all the data. we get about a 100 pages of analysis before every meeting that we're pouring over. the discussions are uh serious. people are challenging each other's ideas and then people are making the best recommendation they can for what they their judgment is on what's right for the US economy, and so, um, you know, the composition may change, but I don't think the quality of the of the dialogue and the seriousness people bring uh changes at all. and you know, I was in the 06 or, excuse me, 2016 to 2020. I was one of the most doish members, reliably the most doish members, because I thought, hey, we're not at maximum un employment, why are we raising interest rates? and then, during the pandemic, I become one of the more hawkish members of the committee, and so people can move around just depending on how the economic conditions change, and I think that's actually the way it should be. one last question: the president of the Minneapolis fed is obviously an important, visible job, with its own stresses. what do you do to get away from it all, or balance life. well, my wife and I have two young children, uh, almost four-year-old son and five and a halfy old daughter, and that introduces its own stresses. so, um, I don't think I ever get away from the stress. it's just a different stress. uh, one stress takes my mind off of the other stress which then takes my mind off of the first stress. so it's it's always stress [Laughter] great. well, as we conclude, I just want to give you one more opportunity to share a message with the audience. is there anything you want to say to this room full of so many excellent people? well, thank you for inviting me. I really appreciate it. appreciate the Q&A. you know just, uh, speak up if you see something happening in your corner of the country that you think is noteworthy. uh, reach out to us. we want to hear from you. this is how we get information about what's happening in our economy, and the more you share with us, the smarter we're going to be. so I really appreciate you inviting me here today, appreciate the Q&A and I look forward to staying in touch. great thanks, apprciate your, cand, your work you do for this country, thank you.