https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/Neel-Kashkari-at-the-2024-Greater-Kansas-City-Chamber-of-Commerce-Leadership-Exchange

Neel Kashkari Q&A at the 2024 Greater Kansas City Chamber of Commerce Leadership Exchange

September 23, 2024

Saint Paul, Minnesota

Neel Kashkari

so, uh, I think it's very appropriate uh that uh our first program is is talking about early childhood education. that's been a a priority of this chamber of commerce uh for years and uh We've made progress, but there's more progress uh to be made. so today we have a special guest, uh, Neil casari, who is the, the chair of the Federal Reserve here in Minneapolis, St Paul. a strong advocate for Early Child Ed education. Neil told me to keep his bio short, uh because we wanted to get the questions uh. uh, but it's pretty impressive. he came out of the Aerospace industry and uh has been leader here at the FED for a number of years. so so I think uh we'll just jump right into it. uh, Neil, if you can talk a little bit uh, some people think it's odd, or maybe a little different that the FED would be involved in this issue. this Federal Reserve Bank bank has been involved in early childhood education and the research behind that for a number of years. perhaps you could just talk about that a little bit, sure? well, first of all, thank you for having me. it's great to see such a terrific turnout from Kansas City uh, here in Minnesota. U- and I know you all know you have a Kansas City fed, which are good friends of ours, and so when I heard you were visiting, I was honored to get the invitation to address you. so thank you. um, a couple things. let me back up for a second. so why did the Minneapolis fed? for literally decades, the Minneapolis fed has been studying the issue of early childhood development, and let me tell you why. I'm going to tell you the short story, which is funny, and then I'm going to tell you the more serious answer. the short story, which is funny- which is probably not going to make me popular with this audience- is: for decades economists have been saying government spending taxpayer money on stadiums is a lousy investment. and some people in Minnesota said: okay, smarty pants, if it's a lousy investment to spend money on stadiums, what should we spend money on? and they did a bunch of work and they said: you know, the single best return that we can come up with for taxpayer money is investing in the early childhood education of low-income kids. that that has the best return to taxpayers over the long term, over anything else our Economist could look at. so that's actually the funny story of how we got into it. why have we stayed in it because the Federal Reserve has a has two goals that you may have heard about. we call them our dual mandate that Congress has assigned us, one of which is stable prices, 2% inflation- you know we're not all the there yet, but we're making progress getting inflation back down- and the other is maximum employment, as many Americans gainfully employed and contributing to our economy. and it turns out, education is enormously important to maximum employment. if you want to have more Americans gainfully employed, hopefully in good jobs, contributing to our society, obviously education is absolutely, uh, a critical issue for there. so we've spent the last couple decades studying issues around educational attainment, education disparities, because it is so tightly linked back to our maximum employment mandate. and what does it mean to be at maximum employment? you actually have to understand how well are our citizenry educated. it's a, it's a key component. so I know the the state passed Constitutional Amendment that guarantees quality education for all. um, and what I understand is the research that the FED did and, and, trust me, it cited way past. you know Minnesota, I mean it's sighted across the country. we talk about a lot in Missouri, but you know how do you think the, the research that the FED did all those years ago and the continuing research led to moving the state forward again. it's a little bit out of what some would think of the norm of the FED, but the research was key, as I understand. in passing, that Constitutional Amendment- so just to clarify the their Constitutional Amendment that you're talking about, what we uh call the page amendment- was not passed. okay, the legislature did not take it forward in in Minnesota. different states are different. for a constitutional amendment to go to the voters it has to go through the state legislature first, not all states. I'm not sure what it is in Missouri. not all states, is that true? but Minneapolis fed's research on the value of investing in Early Education has actually made been cited in many, many states around the country who are just looking at the raw economic analysis, not partisanship, but what does the data show? and the data shows that investing in, especially for low-income families, this can make a huge difference in the outcome for those kids as they get older. now let me back up for a second. my wife and I have two young children. I have a 5-year-old daughter who just started kindergarten and I we have a three-year-old son who's still in child in daycare now we're fortunate that we are able to afford very high quality child care for both of our children before our daughter entered kindergarten. not every family is so fortunate and the economic analysis shows: if you spend taxpayer money on me and my family, that is not a great use of taxpayer money, because we already have the means to make sure that our kids are getting that Head Start, uh from their earliest years. but if you spend that money on the low-income families who do not otherwise have access to that, that's where it can really make a difference and that's where the economic analysis was so powerful and it did make a big. it has made a big difference in Minnesota and in many other states who have cited that research and said: look, this is not a partisan issue, this is an issue of economics, at the end of the day, of how do we, how competitive do we want our states to be and our labor market to be, okay, excellent. so I actually gave you guys credit for passing that. thank you for that. but I I'll be honest with you, even when it's not in my favor. so, uh, so talk a little bit about uh. so you know, I think people that look at educational statistics, uh, from across the the country- I mean Minnesota- is, you know, very high educational attainment as a state, but there are also still gaps, um, and you, how do you begin to address those gaps and what? what are the challenges there so that it really does lift everybody up? so you know, there's one of the neat things about our country is we have 50 states that all have their own policies. we have in some sense a 50 state laboratory, and while Minnesota has historically had very high quality schools on average, very good performance on average, in recent decades those averages have massed some of the worst educational disparities in the country. they're both racial disparities, but they're also socioeconomic disparities. lowincome white children in Minnesota are badly trailing their more well-to-do peers and these gaps are some of the biggest in the country and Minnesota. if I'm going to be honest with you, in the last 20 or 30 years we've not made any progress in closing those gaps. but if you look around the country, some states have made progress. this is not an impossible problem to solve. it does take will to bring people together to actually lead to some transformational change. you know, um, one of the most common push backs that I get when I talk about these issues is they say: well, you first have to solve poverty. poverty is the root of these economic disparities. it actually gets the causation backwards: uh, the education disparities are the perpetuator of poverty, rather than poverty being the cause of the of the education disparities. and I always push back at those, those folks, and I say: look, every state has poverty, and how is it that some states in the country are doing much better for their low-income kids and their minority kids, who are also facing tough economic situations? why are they able to do better and we are not? and so it forces us to try to have some a hard look in the mirror to figure out what are we not doing that they are doing? and so one message I want you to leave with is: this is not an impossible problem to solve. this is a we can solve this. some states are doing it. I would point you to, I show statistics- I don't have them here. if you Lo at, if you looked at Minnesota and Florida 20, 30 years ago, we were about the same in terms of uh disparities in the last 20 or 30 years. Minnesota is right where it was before and Florida has dramatically closed many of the gaps on racial and economic disparities, and I always say to my fellow minnesotans: if Florida can do it, why can't we do it? uh, and usually I don't get very good answers to that question back, and so I would just ask you to look at that for yourselves. so let me ask this and I want to get to questions. um, so for years, uh, quality early childhood education was seen that, at least by the business Community, is kind of a long-term play. I mean that you know, yeah, there' be dividends but it's going to pay. but all of a sudden, you know, with the workforce issue and the access to early Quality, quality early childhood education and how that impacts the workforce has, has there been more momentum with the business community in recent years around this issue? I think there is, because you know I'm talking so far I've been talking about just the economics of investing in low-income kids, but then there's also the workforce issue, about making sure that all of your men and women in your community have the ability to do the jobs that they're trained for you. there's a, there's a quirky thing about, uh, who's counted in the labor force. so, let's say, my wife and I, we both work. let's say, I stayed home to take care of our children and my wife worked, I would not be counted as employed. but if I then traded jobs with somebody else and you took care of my children and you- I- took your job, now we're all counted as employed. so the person who's staying home taking care of the children is actually doing a vitally important job- vitally important to their family and to society- but they're not counted as in the labor market. so part of this is a little bit of a accounting issue, but the question is: are each of us being utilized to our full potential, doing the thing that we are best skilled at? and that's really what: making sure that everybody has access to child care, so that all of our Workforce is able to reach their full potential and contribute fully. and I, I can tell you, um, I'm a pretty involved dad. I don't think I'm the best child care worker you can imagine. I don't think that that's NE, I don't think. you know, I'm not always as patient as I would love to be, um, and so I don't think that would be the best use of me and my skills, uh, if the structure forced me to do that right. so we have, uh, elected officials, State Legislative leaders, we have our Commissioner of Education from Missouri here. we got business Community Civic leaders in the audience. um, so you said you wanted to leave time for questions. that's exactly what we're going to do, uh, so if you have a question, try not. I know it's the first session. don't do that Kansas City polite thing and wait for else. uh, we would love to have the opportunity for Neil to answer some of your questions around these issues and the fed's involvement and the business Community involvement. so, and and we are just you know, we are live streaming this. so, just for the sake of transparency, so we do. we do need you to speak into the mic. yeah, so we have a microphone. I see one right there in back, so Ava is going to run the microphone back. and if you can give us your name, name and who you're with, when you uh ask a question, stand up, don't be, can't say fly or shy. I'm very shy. uh, nator. uh, Spencer Fain. uh, my question would be: um, so what did Florida do? uh, you, you must have, I guess, taken a look at it. I'm just curious, uh, what Florida did do, and and if there were lessons that you've begun to employ here that we could take back. I, I would say Florida's done a lot of different things, um, everything from giving parents more choices to more investing in teacher training to. I know one thing: I I had spoken to former Governor Jeb Bush about some of his education reforms. uh, they put letter grades on. they assign letter grades on schools. you know, data is available if you know where to dig to look at the performance of a school, but it's hard to find and what they tried to do is simplify it for parents and it leads to various stages of grief, like if there's a school down the street that you like but then the state says, hey, this is a. parents get really upset but then eventually it forces people to say: I need to take a hard look at what's really going on and potentially focus on change. so it was not one Silver Bullet, but they did a bunch of different reforms to try to say: let's make sure that all of our children are getting access, uh, to the Quality education they deserve and in some sense forcing parents to confront the reality because ultimately the parents end ending up need to own this and drive this, and a bunch of the reforms uh were controversial, I think, at the time. but if you look at the results over 20 or 30 years, it's remarkable that they've made a lot of progress and at least we in Minnesota have not. okay next, yes, uh, Keith, copen with copen Brooks. um, there's a emerging and Recent research on how important early, uh, childhood development is in the brain and I thought you might talk a little bit about that. that and how early intervention in the preschool years can also dictate you know what happens in later years and why it's so important that it happened early, as opposed to any other time in a a child's early development. thank you for raising that. so there's a. I didn't know any of this till I got to Minnesota and it was fortunate it was before I had children. there's this thing that they've labeled the first thousand days, which are the most important thousand days in brain development of a child, when it's the interaction with the adults, where adults are reading the children, playing with the children, singing songs, playing games, and it's that back and forth interaction that you don't get sitting in front of the television that ends up being so critical to. and then scientists have now studied this and can map it to how children's brains develop in those first years, those first days of life and then how it leads to better outcomes. these are, it turns out, these are things that more welltoo families that have more means and more education background do intuitively. but if you don't have the time because you're working multiple jobs and you don't have someone there to be able to take care of your children, you may not be in a position to do that. and that's that's kind of a scientific lens of why is this intervention, especially for these families that don't otherwise have the resources? why is that so important? so when my kids were going through their first thousand days, I was like, okay, this day counts, man, this is like we're on 775. we got to make it count. yeah, you can take it too far. he was coming. hello, there we go, there we go. all right, I'm Jennifer call you're superintendent of the Kansas City Public Schools. uh, my question for you: I think this is great that you all um decided to make this investment. I strongly support um prek um education, for I would love to see Universal um. but my question for you: as you all decided to make this investment, how did you prep for the workforce? and I asked that because we know we're in the middle of a, a national teacher shortage. how did you all prepare, um, for the demands that you would have? did you have any barriers or did you run into issues? and if you did, what did you all do to take care of that issue? so I apologize, it's a great question and I don't know the answer to your question because we at the Federal Reserve, you know we do economic research. the questions that you're asking are absolutely correct and appropriate for the state and the policies that they ended up implementing and how they ended up Staffing up. so, I apologize, I don't know the answer to your question. uh, could connect you to people who would know, but I don't know off the top of my head. thank you, hi. sorry I'm gonna get out of the sun here. uh, Kalinda ckins, with B Financial um, you talked a lot about how important it was for you to disseminate that information, that economic data, for people to understand. it's not a partisan issue. can you talk about how you did that and what channels you did to make sure people really understood the data that was coming at them, and how, what it really meant? you know, um, I would say imperfectly. we did our best, which is we. we publish a lot of our re, all of our research we publish up on our websites. we get invited, our experts get invited by groups to come and speak, just like I'm coming to speak to you today. uh, sometimes, uh, a legislative committee would say, hey, we want to have a technical presentation from an expert, and state legislator would invite some of our experts in to just give a briefing on what does the research show. not getting involved in your legislation or your legislation, you know that's for the political body to decide. and so I would just say active engagement with the informed public as much as possible, and then, of course, social media and whatnot. um, just trying to stay out there and present. and then you know you all share it. you, those of you, a lot of people care about early childhood education. it's kind of a. you describe it at a high level. it's kind of an easy issue for people to feel good about, and then they pass on interesting things and then it ends up being through word of mouth. and so we had a research director some of you may know, who's still very active. he started this work, art rolnick. uh, he's been very active nationally on these issues and he continues to be, and so I give Art a lot of credit just for his own the, the champion that he became of This research. Neil, thanks for being with us. uh, Rick collie with the lion Insurance Services. um, in your research, is this primarily a public solution, a public, private solution? what? what does your research tell you as to the best way to fix this problem? you know, uh, good question and unfortunately I'm not going to give you a satisfying answer. we didn't really get into, uh, how, how you fix it. we feel like that's the job of the elected bodies to decide. you know tax policy and spending and what they want to spend on. um, I will say that, just as our discussion has showed, business has a keen interest in this because it is about providing their Workforce of the future, and so often times, it really is when business comes together in some form of partnership with government that we've seen the most traction take place. uh, but I don't have any advice for you on how you ultimately were to craft a solution that would make sense for Missouri or for Kansas City. I'll say this: one of the most common pieces of feedback I get from the business community in this region is that we are structurally low on workers. if we forecast out, many businesses here say we don't know where our workers of the future are going to come from, and the first thing we want to do is look here at home and figure out: are we tapping into all of the people who are already here, you know, before we go and say, well, we need to find work from somewhere else? the first question is: can we actually fully utilize the people who are here? and the answer today is no, because our education system is not serving everybody equally and so we're leaving some people behind, and so I think businesses really realized that their workers of the future and their own competitiveness, uh, is aligned with trying to fix this and address this issue. hi, I'm Mike bang with commer bank and I feel compelled to represent Clint Robinson here today with a question. Clint is a longtime attendee, is in Ireland today with his do for his daughter's wedding, so he's not here you mentioned. I wish Florida were here to speak as well, but Kansas efforts so far to scorekeep grade whatever have been met with extreme resistance from teachers and teachers, un and things of that nature. Florida obviously figured that out somehow. was that part of the problem you had here, that it didn't move forward, or tell me the Dynamics as you tried to move these Concepts forward. yeah, it's um. you know I'll leave the politics for for all of you to to figure out. um, politics can be complicated and you know systems can be resistant to change. and um, that's all I'll say. good afternoon. we met just a few minutes ago. I'm represented Brenda Shields from St Joseph, and the people in this room know that um, I have been an admirer of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve since the early 2000s when I attended a conference and there was a breakout session in the Federal Reserve- the case for early childhood- and I thought to myself, why would they care? and it was a compelling presentation. I have been working in the early childhood Arena ever since. in Missouri, we have tried for the past two years to pass legislation that is both a private and um public partnership with with government. we are M. we manage every year to get it out of the Missouri house with a large majority of votes, and we are always unsuccessful in the Senate because um, one of the arguments is that that that government doesn't need to be involved in the lives of families and government doesn't need to be involved in helping businesses succeed. that that is all for themselves. and those are the two um barriers that rece on the Missouri Senate. so if any of you are from Missouri, we will probably bring this legislation up again this year. and if you know Senators, I ask that you talk to them and you tell them how important early childhood is um for your workers. that that I know because we have surveyed you. that that we know that so much of the time your workers don't come to work and they site the reason that they can't come to work is because their child care fell through. and it's not that we just need child care, but we need quality child care. for for every reason that you said that those first a thousand days are the time in which we are developing brains. so I'm sorry I don't have a question today really, other than I am. I am just I I felt compelled that I need to speak and and I have just admired the Minneapolis um Federal Reserve for years and have followed them for you taking the lead in pointing out this important issue for the future of our children and our country and the future Workforce. so thank you very much. thank you. I knew that was coming at some point. I thought there was be a a question coming on interest rate, so I'll take that one gladly. So, within the business Community, um, so one of the things we're going to explore, uh, where we're here is, I mean, there are a number of both uh, American and and World corporate headquarters here. have there been particular champions of this issue within the, the business Community? we have a group here called the um. I mean, the chambers are very active here. we also have a group here called the Minnesota Business Partnership, which are the CEOs of the largest businesses in Minnesota. uh, this is an issue that they have been deeply involved in since the beginning, uh, and I think they have been very helpful and help driving this forward again across party lines, again just making the economic argument for them and the and the business bottom line argument for them, and so, uh, I definitely think that those are folks that you should continue to talk to. yeah, good advice. other questions: yes, Mike is coming to you right behind you. I me, I may just stay seated because I'm kind of trapped here. it's by my own doing um, the. I'm very familiar with the, with the FED data, very, I think others have said it, great data, but I'm curious if you have any insights into what the story was that maybe help move the issue forward. you know, um, uh, it's a little bit what I said earlier, which is, if you think about all the tough challenges that we face as Society, this is probably the one that is easiest to get behind, because we're like, hey, don't we want little kids to get a fair chance at a better life and a fair chance at a good education, and then they can get a good job and then they can contribute. so I feel like this, this issue, amongst all the issues that we, the challenges we face, is probably the one that it's easier to get people behind, just because who it's about, and, um, and I'm not- I don't mean that- to belittle it- I mean I think that's a, that's a, that there's a reason. we all care, kind of intuitively, and so, um, I don't have a better explanation than that, but I've not come across an issue like this where people immediately say, yeah, I get that and you know what that kid deserves: a better shot too. got time for one more question? yep, hi, Rob Ste with the Children's Mercy, Kansas City. one of the small but significant parts of early childhood education, uh is home visiting and it is that th those types of programs have actually been one of the few that have enjoyed increased funding on at the federal level. um, for those of you who don't know, parents as teachers is one of the curricula that are part of that and that was started in Missouri. I'm curious if if nibbling at that part could help expand the conversation or if any of the research and that you've done supports expanding that uh capability. I I've definitely heard that. I mean I've heard that um, art roll neck, the gentleman that I mentioned, and I I bumped into him the other a few months ago and he mentioned that they're showing the positive Returns on even before um the babies are born, starting the home visits to begin preparing the, the new couple, the new family, with hey, when your baby arrives, of course you need to take care of the baby and feed and whatnot, but also begin teaching them about the importance of reading to children from the earliest age. so I think all of the anecd. I haven't seen the science on that, but I'd be surprised if the science on that didn't show similar positive contributions and positive Returns. the more you can just get to people and realize, hey, the most basic things that you can do: reading to your children, singing, playing with them. actually, that is part of the early childhood development story, an important part of it. so very good, well, let me wrap this up. I I just want to say thank you, and obviously you can tell that this group is passionate about the issue. uh, you know, give our chamber credit. uh, we were talking about this issue when others weren't. uh, just like the FED in uh Minneapolis was talking about this issue when others weren't. so I think it's been a great way to kick off our trip and, Neil, we appreciate you. sh. thank you very much, appreciate it.