https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-at-the-2024-michigan-bankers-association-convention-

Neel Kashkari at the 2024 Michigan Bankers Association Convention

June 20, 2024

Mackinac Island, Michigan

Neel Kashkari

you. I know this isn't the easiest place to get to, so how was your travels today? uh, everything, hi, everyone, we're going to get started. uh, this is my first time on the island. it was, uh, it was a fun experience and, uh, some of my colleagues got here a couple days earlier and they said it was very hot coming over in the ferry. I took the ferry this morning and it was uh nice and cool. so couldn't, uh, couldn't- ask for better. great, well, great, how about if you tell us a little bit about yourself, about your career? um, we're anxious to hear about that, and we also want to hear about you personally, how you grew up in Ohio. sure, well, first of all, thank you for having me. uh, my name is Neil kashari. I'm president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. uh, there are, you may know this, but there are 12 federal reserve banks scattered around the country, the ninth of which is the Minneapolis fed, and our jobs are to represent What's called the ninth Federal Reserve District, that's, Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, Northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. in 1913, Congress did something unique when they created the Federal Reserve System. they didn't want all of the Power simply housed in the nation's capital. they wanted all the regions of the country directly represented in the policymaking process, so they created the Board of Governors that you've obviously heard of- Jerome Powell is the chairman of the Board of Governors- and they created these 12 independent federal reserve banks and our jobs are to represent this region in the nation's monetary policy process. so my colleagues and I spent a lot of time traveling around the region to understand what's happening in the regional economy so I can bring this information back with me to Washington DC. I go every six weeks to fomc meetings where we set interest rates for the nation. now we cannot set a different interest rate for Michigan and for Minnesota and for California. it's the same monetary policy, the same currency for the whole country. but a big part of my job is to understand what's happening in our regional economy and then bring this information to Washington so that it's part of the deliberative process and ultimately I'm making a recommendation for what monetary policy I think makes sense for the nation as a whole. but it's informed by the conversations like these that we're going to have today, and so I'm honored to be here. uh, you're right, I did grow up in Ohio. I was born and raised in Ohio, outside of akan, uh, the. it's a lot of wonderful things about growing up with North North Eastern Ohio. one of the burdens that I've carried with me my whole life is being a lifelong Cleveland Browns fan. um, those of you who are lions fans can somewhat appreciate the, the struggle that I've been through. uh, but it's in my blood. there's nothing I can do about it, uh, and so someday, uh, you know they'll get through. but I've done a bunch of different things. I was an aerospace engineer, worked in banking, was at the US Treasury Department during the financial crisis, and I've now been at the Minneapolis fed. this is my ninth year. reading your bio. you have a very interesting career path. yeah, it's um somewhat unpredictable. what's next for you? well, things are great, you know. um, the economy keeps throwing us these curve balls, which are very challenging in many ways. so the first four or five years that I was at the Minneapolis fed, we struggled with too low inflation. it was coming at about 1.5%. we kept thinking we were at maximum employment and inflation wasn't coming, and so that was a a different type of challenge for monetary policy makers to understand. then, of course, Co hit, which is a whole new challenge to try to understand, followed by a ex, very quickly- a banking crisis, a financial markets crisis, in the march of April time frame of 2020. fed responded very aggressively. then, of course, we had the very high inflation that we've been struggling with, and now we're bringing it down, trying to get that soft Landing that we're all hoping for. so my job has been very interesting in, actually, because the US economy has faced a number of different challenges that we're all trying to navigate our way through. so, so far, um, I'm finding this a remarkable opportunity for me personally. good, so there's a tradeoff between, um, your two mandates. you have two mandates on conducting monetary policy, basically, maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest rates. there's tradeoffs between those two goals. how do you in the FED balance those tradeoffs? well, the Dual mandate, uh, that you just mentioned. so, stable prices and maximum employment. this is that, the. this is what our goal is. our goals are that Congress has assigned us, but at the heart of this is some fundamental lack of understanding of how inflation works, I mean on our part. so we have these two things. we think of them like a seesaw. the economy gets hot. businesses all of you and your customers have to compete to find workers. the unemployment rate drops, but that leads to higher wages and that leads to inflation. so the Seesaw gets out of balance and then, in that situation, we would raise interest rates to try to tap the brakes on the labor market, bring inflation back down. that's how it's supposed to work. in April or May of 2021, when we were coming out of covid, core inflation finally cross the 2% Mark and the unemployment rate was still six, so that in that situation, core inflation's at two, where we want it to be. there's still a lot of. there are millions of unemployed Americans. the labor market still has a lot of slack. that constellation of data does not tell you that you're going to have a big inflation problem, but of course we did. we had this huge inflation Spike up to 8 n%, and so at the root of this, there's a lot of misunderstanding of the way we understand how inflation works and what all the different sources of inflation are. so what ended up happening? we had this huge inflation that was mostly driven not by the labor market. it was mostly driven by the supply side of the economy. so you had, uh, a huge amount of stimulus put out at a time when the services economy was shut, so you and I couldn't go out to restaurants or go on airplanes, so we bought way more Goods than we would normally buy. so there's more pressure on the goods economy and the goods economy had huge disruptions in Supply chains so all of a sudden inflation skyrocketed on that part of the economy and then eventually- and then you had Russia invading Ukraine, upending commodity markets at the same time- each one of those factors individually was inflationary. you put them together and you had a huge spike in inflation. all of that was outside of our traditional framework for analyzing the labor market and inflation and how those two things are related. so it was a very challenging analytical problem that we faced. but even though our analytical tools were limited, we knew we had to move aggressively with interest rates to try to bring demand back down, to start to level things back off, and so the good news is we have raised interest rates aggressively. it has tamped down demand and a lot of the supply disruptions that caused the inflation in the first place have mostly normalized, which has helped bring infl inflation not all the way, but a long way back down to our Target. so what are your expectations of inflation for the future. well, we're going to get back down to 2%. the question is: how long is it going to take to get there? uh, the second half of last year. if you just looked at the second half data of last year, there was rapid disinflation process progress. if you just looked at the second half of last year, we were basically home. we were basically home. the second half of last year was very close to 2% inflation rate, but then we saw a tick back up in the first quarter of this year. so now we're running at something just a little bit below a 3% inflation rate. it'll probably take a year or two to get all the way back down to our 2% Target. the good news in all of this is that the labor market has remained remarkably strong. we still have around a 4% unemployment rate nationally, which is still quite a low level of unemployment. it's higher than it was a year ago, but it's still quite low. most businesses I talked to are still hiring, still have to compete to find workers. wage growth is still pretty good for workers. uh, by some measures might be still a little bit too high. uh, to get back to our 2% inflation Target. so getting all the way back to 2% is going to take a little more time, but I'm confident that we're going to get there good. so how do you feel about the future of banking in the United States? most are struggling with their net interest margin due to a Fed Miss on transitory inflation, the inverted yield curve, along with pressure on non-interesting income and compliance costs. you know there's a um. the banking industry has been under big challenges for a long time, which is: you're seeing there are large economies of scale and you're seeing as customers adopt technology- we all use our iPhones. these are expensive Technologies. to access it. it's been very hard for small Banks to be able to offer the services that many of their customers want, and so that's led to consolidation over time that you all know better than I do. that trend is probably going to continue, um, maybe even accelerate in some Dimension, but I'll say the opposite of this. the value of Community Banks was made abundantly clear during the pandemic: the number of businesses that I came across, small businesses that had had relationships with large Global Banks who could not help them during the pandemic and then they had to go to, for example, getting access to the PPP, and then they had to go down the street to a community bank that they did not previously have a relationship with, were able to open a business account, get access and get the support that they needed. I think that the community banking industry really showed its value at a time of national crisis- um- and I know Community Bankers have been saying this for a long time, but it became apparent to everybody else how true that was. so I think we have a real policy challenge as a country, because another thing that happened last year- you all know- Silicon Valley Bank failed and- and it illuminated. I've been very vocal about the issue of two big defail banks for a long time. like I was at the front line of the 08 banking crisis. I think having two big defail banks at the center of our economy is a real challenge for the country. but there was another dimension of this that I didn't appreciate, which is, when Silicon Valley Bank failed, many business customers said: I don't know if my bank is going to enjoy the full back stop of the government, so I need to move my funds to one of those giant Banks that's unambiguously too big to fail, and so what? what ended up opening my eyes to is the fact that some banks were too big to fail actually created a systemic risk for everybody else, because now it said, well, let's just move our money to that giant bank. I know the government's going to support them. and the CEO of a next tier Bank a few months ago actually said this publicly. he said he needs to get his bank bigger because they're in the ambiguous category: are they too big to fail or not? not sure they need to get bigger into that giant category to so they can satisfy any customers concerns about whether the government's going to back them up. this is a huge challenge for us as a country. it's a huge challenge that having four or five giant Banks having this- uh, premium position it's obviously, it's unfair and it's a concern for taxpayers. but it also creates all of these Dynamics within the banking system that that are really not healthy or U sustainable. but this is a. this is a policy question for our political system to address. you know, the Federal Reserve recently issued a proposal to raise the capital requirements on the very largest banks and there's been a lot of blowback. by the way, there's been a lot of blowback even from small Banks. even this prop, this proposal, was for the giant Banks. I mean to me as an independent policy matter. if you want to level the playing field between small Banks and giant Banks, you got to raise the capital requirements on the giant Banks, because if you look at America today, most small banks have much higher levels of capital than the giant Banks. it's the opposite of the way it should be. so, anyway, I'm giving you a long speech here in answer to your question, uh, I think Community Banks play a very important role in our society, but I also recognize there are huge challenges. some of them are real, some of them are policy challenges, some of them are regulatory challenges- and that we need to try to address them. because I don't think ending up in an economy where we just have five or six Banks serving the whole country, I don't think that's optimal for the US economy either. well, I think for a smaller Community Bank. um, sometimes we feel like there's a lot of trickle down effect. when you mandate things for the larger Banks, they end up um, going down to the Community Banks. do you feel like that's um might be something that can happen here? I- I mean, I don't think in the proposal has written that that was um. I, I understand that concern and I, I get it, but, um, I, I, I'm surprised, I'm, I'm just I'm surprised at the breath of the blowback, um, from some folks that I was surprised were pushing back. but you know, good, that's all I'll say. okay, do you feel that there's a disconnect between fiscal and monetary policy and are you sometimes frustrated by that? well, you know, there's a clear, you all understand it. there's a clear distinction between fiscal and monetary policy. fed Independence means that we set monetary policy to try to achieve our dual mandate goals of stable prices and maximum employment and we leave fiscal policy to the elected officials. how much do they want to tax? who do they want to tax? how much do they want to spend? uh, how much debt do they want to issue? so that's the big distinction. ultimately, we take fiscal policy as an input to our analysis of the economy. so, all things being equal, if the federal government is going to borrow more and spend more on the margin, you would think that that's going to lead to a somewhat higher rate environment to try to balance out savings and investment and to get to our 2% inflation Target. so we're not here to Aline on whether fiscal policy is right or wrong. we just take it as an input into our analysis of where the economy is headed and then we're going to adjust our monetary policy appropriately. okay, it seems that the FED has provided um more forward guidance recently, um, compared to the past. the guidance is often incorrect. do you feel that the current tools are effective in forecasting e economic condition? realizing the complexity of it? so it's very hard, um, I appreciate it. I came in at the end of the prior speaker. I appreciated how specific he was on what's going to happen this year, um, and I'm very interested to see how it works out. it's very, very hard to know. you know, right now we've all been giving- my colleagues and I have on the FC, have all been giving a lot of guidance about interest rates. but you know what we're all basically saying. it depends what happens to the economy. if inflation is persistent on the margin, that's going to keep rates higher for longer. if inflation Falls, that means we can normalize rates more quickly. so if you, you could, if you could tell me what's going to happen to inflation, what's going to happen to job growth, then I'll be able to tell you what happens to interest rates. but it really does depend on what happened to the economic fundamentals. we started issuing something called the summary of economic projections eight or nine years ago. uh, and we? The Dot Plot, which youve probably heard about, gets a lot of attention. you know my my view of the Dot Plot varies. most of the time I don't like it. once in a while it proves to be a very, very useful tool, but the moment it's useful, then you know, 6 months from now you regret it because you're having to make, essentially, forecasts that people take very seriously and you can't communicate just how uncertain you really are because you have to put these handful of dots down, and so all central banks are struggling with how do we provide gu? what we want to do is we want to provide guidance to you on what we call our reaction function, and what that means is: if the economy does the following, then this is how we would respond with interest trades. that way, when you see the data, you can say, okay, this is probably what it means for monetary policy. I can then make some plans for my investments and my business going forward, and so the challenge is: how do you communicate this reaction function in a way that doesn't signal confidence that this is exactly what's going to happen, but gives you all enough information to know what it is we're looking at. and so I think all central banks are struggling with this um, because the future is UN certain. and yet if we went back and told nothing, I don't think that that's better either, because then you're just like: well, what are they looking at? you know what? what data actually do we care about? um, it's, it's a tricky thing that central banks are trying to figure out. so how are you feeling about the future and in interest rates going forward? well, I feel you know the US economy has proven to be remarkably resilient. so people have uh, noticed that there's right now A Divergence in monetary policy between the US and most other advanced economies. most other, many other advanced economies are already beginning to cut interest rates, and there's a uncertainty about when the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates. may not be, for you know, some people say toward the end of the year or maybe next year, as your prior speaker had indicated. well, what's leading to that Divergence? all of these economies are experiencing disinflation, so that's good news. but Europe, for example, and Canada have much lower, lower economic growth while they're experiencing that disinflation. in the US. we're experiencing disinflation, but we've actually had remarkable economic growth, so the US economic fundamentals are very good, so that's been a pleasant surprise. a year, a year and a half ago, when we raised rates so aggressively, I thought we were slamming the brakes with two feet on the demand side of the US economy and a lot of people were forecasting that we'd be in a recession by by the end of last year. not only did the recession not come, the second half of last year we had very strong economic growth. so I feel optimistic that the fundamentals of the US economy right now are very sound and strong, and I'm hopeful that that is going to continue, though there's- so there's- some evidence of some softening around the margins. so you know we'll see, but right now the fundamentals look quite good, much better than most other advanced economies around the world. so it sounds like there's an opportunity potentially for a soft Landing, knowing that we have had an inverted yield curve for the longest in recent history. yeah, again, the inverted yield curve is often a predictor of recessions and this time, knock on wood, it has not been a predictor, at least within the time period that one would have expected a recession to come. it has not happened? U and why is that? why has the US economy been so resilient underlying this? you know it's it's a little bit hard to know. uh, productivity growth looks like it's been high in the recent period. is that going to be maintained? you know? good question. I don't. I don't know how much. what is ai's imprint going to be on productivity growth? highly uncertain right now. most experts say it'll be many years before it actually shows up in the productivity data. if it in fact does show up in the productivity data, you know we will see. U many businesses have had to innovate because they couldn't get the workers that they needed. maybe that has led to a productivity Improvement. I'll give you just an example of of how uncertain some of these things are. so when the pandemic hit- and in America we have a unemployment system where basically businesses lay off their workers, workers go on to unemployment and then, when the economy restarts and reopens and recovers, those workers get drawn back in. but usually you don't go back to your old employer. they kind of resort and go to wherever business, whatever business- is hiring. well, Europe has a different system that tries to keep workers on the job but earning less money so that they're not thrown onto unemployment but they're reconnected to their businesses. so I was in London for a conference like this a few couple months ago- a month ago- and there was a lot, of, a lot of people there were trying to understand why Europe's productivity growth was so slow. one uh reason that they speculated was that Europe's system of keeping workers attached to those businesses was inefficient, that you were keeping workers in businesses that was not putting them to the most productive use, as opposed to the US system, which seems very traumatic in the moment. people lose their jobs, they go on unemployment, but then they Resort going to the businesses that are paying the most and maybe that's allocating workers much more efficiently than they're doing in Europe. you know, we don't know. I don't know which system is, overall, better. maybe there's strengths to both, but that's that's one possible explanation for the differences in productivity that we're enjoying in America versus what they're experiencing in Europe right now. okay, thank you. um, compliance cost in banking. I I do feel like that's really one of the key things: that pushing, pushing consolidation- it's just drowning smaller Community Banks. thoughts on that. I mean, I know it's a, I know it's a serious issue. I don't make light of it at all. um, and I- I know I can speak for the FED- we have a lot of regulators at the Minneapolis fed are supervisors. uh, we want to be smart and efficient and and provide prudent supervision. uh, Accord, you know, according to the rules, uh, without being needlessly burdensome, uh. but we also find, you know, Banks cutting Corners. we also find people getting in trouble. we also find, you know, I was shocked- that Silicon Valley Bank got into the trouble, that they were in and created a system crisis in a split second across big sections of the banking system. and so, you know, banking is a complicated business. it's a business that unfortunately has Bad actors. I mean, every industry does, but when there are Bad actors in banking, there are broader consequences for the economy and for the taxpayers, and so, um, we want to be efficient, but we also want to make sure that people are following the rules, and it's a, it's a balancing act. thank you, switch gears a little bit and talk about cryptocurrency. I know you've been outspoken skeptic about cryptocurrency, also wondering how you're feeling, feeling about digital currency overall. the question I've been asking about, um, say, Bitcoin- I've been asking this now for seven or eight years. what problem in the real world is it solving? and I always ask people- this is not a fair audience because you all are Bankers, so, um, but I was asked people: has anybody here ever bought something with Bitcoin? a, a sandwich, a book? somebody in the back has his hand up. what did you buy, sir? you bought tax software using Bitcoin, okay. could you have bought it using your credit card? yeah, okay. so what can? what problem can you solve with Bitcoin that you cannot already solve in part of your daily life? the answer is: nothing. and it's now been more than a Dozen Years. and the use case for Bitcoin. you know companies are doing back flips trying to find some problem that this thing actually solves that normal credit cards and banking products don't already solve, and nobody's been able to find it. contrast that with AI. so AI is brand new. but we're all hearing about use cases almost every day, like I saw a video of somebody had an AI translator. you know I would speak in English and it would speak Italian if I was meeting with somebody from Italian. that's very cool. that's an actual use case. I heard an anecdote where somebody went to their veterinarian to get their dog checked out and at the end of their vet visit. there there had been AI listening to the vet visit and the AI took the conversation between the doctor and the? U the owner of the dog, summarized it in an email and then that went into the dog's file and that went to the home the dog owner as a summary of the visit. that's very cool, cool. so there are actual use cases for AI that are being developed every day and that's like a year or two old and they're already lots of use cases. so for me, if I contrast cryptocurrency- 12 years desperately searching for any actual use case- versus AI, where new use cases are coming up all the time- it's completely different. so I'm- I'm continue to be- a Bitcoin skeptic and by that token, I'm also a central bank digital currency skeptic. because what I ask all of my colleagues at the FED who are want to study this, I say: whatat problem do you think it solves? so digital currencies exist right now. I can send you anybody in this room $5 right now with venmo or zel or PayPal. so that is a digital currency. what is it that a central bank digital currency can do that venmo or zel or PayPal can't do? and nobody's been able to articulate an answer to that question. so I'm skeptic and I'm not, you know, philosophically opposed. I'm. I'm pro-innovation, but I want to understand what it is we're trying to actually address. uh, and then I you know, Europe. one other thing I'll say: the European Central Bank seems very keen on launching a European Central Bank digital currency. so I asked somebody uh related to the European Central Bank. I said: why are you guys so excited about this? you know what problem is it going to solve? and and what I finally got the answer was: Europe doesn't like being beholden to Visa, Mastercard in American Express, and they have tried to launch competitors that have not taken ground, not gotten traction. so a European Central Bank digal Curren digital currency might be a way for them to create a payments card or something that's a competitor to Visa, AMX and Master Card. you don't need to actually be a central bank digital currency to do it, but this might be the Catalyst for them to finally have their own version of that, and I get that okay, but that's. we don't have that problem here in America. so I understand why Europe might be interested in it. I don't see the value proposition in the US makes sense- one of the things you started when you came to the Minneapolis Fed was the opportunity and inclusion growth Institute. can you tell us a little bit more about that? sure, when I first got to the Minneapolis fed and I started visiting- so this is 2016 and I started visiting- um- a lot of businesses said they can't find workers, were out of workers, historic worker shortages. and then I would go into lower income communities and I'd meet people who are looking for work and I would try to understand why is there this disconnect? businesses say they can't find workers and yet these folks that live in our communities can't find jobs. why are there the these barriers to employment? a factoid, a not good fact? in America, black, black unemployment is almost always twice white unemployment. so if black unemployment is, if white unemployment is four, there's a good guess that black unemployment is going to be 8%. and even if you go for, even if you compare high school graduate to high school graduate or college graduate to college graduate, it's remarkably consistent- that same 2:1 ratio. so I started asking Economist that I work with: why is this always 2: one? what are the structural reasons that caused these disparities? and I was surprised at how few good answers I got, so I realized, as much research expertise as there is at the Federal Reserve. we didn't know enough about some of these fundamental disparities in our society, so we launched the opportunity inclusive growth Institute to bring in, to bring in experts to study some of these disparities- not just, you know, racial disparities, um gender disparities, socioeconomic disparities- to understand what's at the root of them and what can one do, what could policy makers do to try to close some of these gaps. we know we can't close the gaps with monetary policy alone, but if we can illuminate these and understand them, then maybe legislators or fiscal policy makers could take them up and Implement potential Solutions. and so the The Institute is now six or seven years underway and is is making um great strides. great job, that's exciting, thank you. so what else are you doing when you're in Michigan? it's a short visit, um visiting with all of you, and I look forward, hopefully, to getting your questions here in a few minutes and hearing your feedback about the, the local economy. I'm going to be visiting some tribes, uh this afternoon to understand. you know, Indian country and reservations are a big part of our district. uh, they have unique challenges, many different challenges on different tribes. so visiting with a couple tribes and then doing a round table of small businesses uh, before heading back to Minneapolis tomorrow morning. great, thank you for for being here. what we're going to do now is turn it over to the audience and ask for questions, so microphone will come to you uh and in full disclosure, we're live streaming this, so you'll uh, maybe you could say your name and and who you're affiliated with before you speak up. thank you very much for your comments and for coming to meet with us. uh, my name is Steven ranzini. I'm President of University Bank. I've been the president there for be 36 years next month. so I hear uh in your uh remarks a remarkable disconnect between fiscal policy and monetary policy and uh, what's on my mind, and I think a lot of my colleagues Minds, is that the federal deficit is 6.2% of GMP uh. the federal debt is now held in private hands, now north of 100% of GMP uh. secretary Yellen has issued official treasury reports saying that the current path of fiscal U? uh policy is unsustainable, that the national debt will rise to 531 per under her projection of GMP uh over the next uh 40 years. um, if in, if, if the deficit is 6.2%, all other things being equal, why, over time, wouldn't the inflation rate rise to, in past, 6.2%? with all those facts on the table, uh, a few. I'll say a few things in response. just if you, if you have a higher debt profile, then the in interest rate necessary to achieve the 2% would, on the margin, be higher. so we, the Federal Reserve, can set the inflation rate, central banks can set the inflation rate, and then, as everybody adjusts to what we say we're going to do, and then we follow through with our actions, we can get there, but the interest rate will be end up being higher. so the question, I think, really is: what rate? if those projections are right, what rate will treasury have to pay on the debt that they issue to fund those deficits? and this is a big question mark. we don't know. so Japan has roughly twice as much debt to GDP as America, and they've had Rock Bottom interest rates for the last 20 or 30 years. other countries have had much lower levels of debt and had very, very high interest rates as a result of that. so what, what, which of those is going to happen? I don't know. but the FED can achieve the 2% inflation rate. we will simply adjust the interest rates that we need to deliver that inflation rate. but are we more like Japan or are we more like Argentina? you know you can decide that, did I you? I'm trying to read your facial expression if you find my answer convincing or not. um, right over here I'll repeat it back. go ahead. no, that's not mathematics. that inflation is going to rise to 6.2%. it's not mathematics. so the people who talk about the moneys side predicting inflation, have been wrong. uh, consistently. so the money supply folks a year ago were saying that the Federal Reserve was plunging the American economy into the depths of the Great Depression. by how fast we were retracting the money supply and yet we had very strong economic growth. so it's not mathematical like that. but on the margin you would think bigger debts should mean higher inflation, should mean higher interest rates. and that's why I go back to: is the US Treasury, when it funds itself, is it going to be issuing 10-year bonds at a 4 and a half% yield, at a 3 and a half% yield, at something higher than 4 and a half% yield? I don't know the answer to that, but ultimately it'll show up in interest rates that the government has to borrow at to fund their deficits, but we're going to be able to achieve the inflation rate because we will adjust monetary policy appropriate to achieve the goals that we're supposed to achieve. um Ray bigs, um chair-elect of, uh, the Michigan banking Association. uh, there was a our. our previous speaker spoke about, um, the declining number of banks. you know, take pick a time: 15,000, 14,000, we're just over 4,000 now, plus or minus you, we've lost quite a few Banks. is there a bias that exists at the regulatory, whether it be fed FDIC, OCC- is there a bias towards less Banks? it is harder you the threshold, for good reason. there should be more capital. I mean, takes a little more, a little more to start a bank these days. but is there a an active bias towards less Banks? I don't think there is. um, uh, and I, as I said earlier, I think we all recognize the critical role that small Banks play in our communities that are simply it's not realistic that some money center bank is going to be able to provide the credit in all of the little small towns Across America. uh, so I don't think that that is, but I think it's a. we struggle with some of the things that I talked about, which is we want to make sure that customers are are protected. we want to make sure people are following rules. you know, um one of the proponents of crypto. one of the things that they'll point to is: oh, it's so much easier to open this Bitcoin account. yeah, because you don't have no your customer requirements, right? well, we have no your customer requirements for a reason, and so we have anti-money laundering requirements for a reason, and so I think we believe that those right we want to get rid of. we should get rid of regulations that don't make sense, but a lot of the. there's a root cause for a lot of the regulations that are out there, and so how do we keep um the regulations that we need? how do we apply them as light touch as possible, while making sure that people can operate their banks in a safe and sound manner, knowing who your customers are, and VI not supporting money laundering, which nobody here wants to do so, but there's no bias against small Banks. it's just we got to get the regulatory balance right. I have a tough question for you. my name is Patrick Irvin, I'm with independent bank and, uh, I know that you're going to be probably constrained in your answer on this, but how much do you think the current Administration is contributing to our ongoing inflation? now, what I want to that's a broad question, but specifically, when this Administration came in, it seemed like they were overly excited to participate in the government giveaway that was taking place because of Co and that, and it was interesting when you went through your list of things that were inflationary, you didn't touch upon that, because to me that seems like that's what lit the fuse- is that you had unemployment, but we were paying people to be unemployed and uh, and they had money in their pockets. so they're consumers without being producers. and it continues on because, as our previous speaker pointed out, uh, we have a- uh anti-inflationary bill that goes through- that's the title of it. I forget the specific title- but, uh, but it's spending more money. and then we have forgiveness of dead. we have, we have constant stimulus from this Administration. that is, uh, flying in the face of the exact thing you're trying to do and that's get inflation lower. and so the political question, or the economic question, without picking a party, is that, if we continue on this path another four years, isn't it just flying in the face of what you're trying to accomplish? so, um, I let me just adjust one thing you said. I did mention in my list of inflationary components a lot of stimulus, and both stimulus and monetary stimulus, at a time when the services economy was shut and all that stimulus was then channeled to Goods, where there was also Supply disruption. so all of that was inflationary in the same direction. um, I'll tell you one thing that I was surprised by part of the reason that I thought- and I was one of the camp that thought that inflation was transitory- was I agreed with you that people were getting a lot of benefits. unemployment insurance was very high and I thought that was keeping people off the side, on the, the sidelines. but remarkably, when those ex enhanced benefits went away, there was no wave of workers coming back. I was surprised. I thought that there would be. so there wasn't a lot of evidence that that was actually what was keeping people on the sidelines. and as the economy has gotten stronger, people have now come back to work and labor force participation has returned, at least among prime age workers. um, so stimulus is part of it. I agree that it is part of it. I'll just go back to the earlier question that the the one of the gentlemen asked was if you have high deficits continuing on the margin, you were going to see a higher interest rate policy necessary to achieve our 2% Target and on the margin you would expect them- the government, when they borrow money, is going to be borrowing money at higher rates. so a big question that we have is: before the pandemic hit, we had a low rate environment. the government was borrowing very cheaply. the federal funds rate was very low. are we going back back to that environment or are we going back to something new? maybe something much, much higher? it's a big unknown right now. some forces suggest we're going back. so demographics- as Society gets older, people save more. uh, that probably pushes interest rates down. the demographic Trends are continuing. that would suggest we're going back down to low rates. uh, productivity growth: is it going up because of AI or is it going to go back down to the low levels we had before? if it goes back down to the low levels we had before, then we're probably going to be in a low interest rate environment and then you have the fiscal deficits proba maybe pushing up somewhat. so where does that all balance out? I don't know the answer to that, but all I can say to you is the Federal Reserve will adjust to all of these macro forces, adjust our interest rate path to get inflation where we need to get to. I have a quick followup question that well, it's a different question actually. uh, do you, do you recognize that that your the interest rates, that the FED Rising the rates is inflationary in of itself and that you raise costs across the board which then factor in? it's almost as though, uh, you know, when you're in this, the very high ranges that you are, the the you went past the median level, if there is one that you become part of. the inflationary problem and the higher interest rates that businesses have to pay is factored into every product and service that is sold, so it's a self-fulfilling profit at some point. and do you factor that in and recognize that, that fact? well, I'll give you an example. where this comes up, a lot is in the housing market, which is we've had for 10 years, we've underbuilt housing in our country, so we've a a housing shortage. and then people will say, well, you're raising rates, which means that there's much less likely there's going to be new construction to fill that housing Supply. uh, I would say to you, it's a timing issue. we, I believe our interest rate policy can Tamp down demand in the short to medium medium run. once we get inflation back down, rates will then normalize and then you can have the supply side of the economy normalize as well. so I think it's a timing mismatch. but you know, in the late 70s and early 80s when the Federal Reserve rais interest rates very aggressively to way double digit levels to get inflation down, that didn't cause inflation, that broke the back of inflation. so I mean I'm confident that monetary policy can bring inflation back down. the question is, how quickly does it do that and how much? and you know, do we cause a hard Landing or can we actually achieve the soft landing? and I'd be while you guys are getting the microphone. I'd be also interested in hearing how do you view the economy? how are things going in your communities, in the businesses that you serve? i' I'd welcome hearing any feedback on that as well. hi, I'm Charlie Crowley from JY Montgomery Scott. just curious back to your days at Treasury and tarp U. there still is this big misperception a lot of politicians and probably popular culture about bank bailouts and you know not a recognition that that treasury, you know got a positive return on tarp and and really did some great things. and these Banks fund the FDIC and what? what can the fed do to help educate politicians in in our, our country about how important it's? just one thing about how important the banking industry is: it's so underappreciated. well, it's a good um. my old boss, the treasury secretary H Paulson, used to to joke that, uh, 60% of Americans were against water boarding- you know, torture- and 90% were against the tarp. um, and I was the guy who ran the tarp. uh, so I don't think we're going to win that, that uh messaging, uh, that messaging battle. I mean, look, I, I hate we did bail out the banks, the biggest banks absolutely did no question about it and I was at the center of it. I hated that. we had to do it, but it was necessary to prevent the country from plunging into the Great Depression. now the problem is with the banking sector. you know, businesses make mistakes all the time. but in most sectors of the economy, when businesses make big mistakes, there's no risk of Bringing Down the entire US economy. but when the banking sector, the big banking sector, makes big mistakes, you can actually inflict widespread harm to the US economy, much Beyond just that sector itself, and so banking is different. banking is special in that way, and that's why governments around the world run in to stabilize their banking sectors. and so, um, you know, I think explaining to the American people the vital role that Banks play is important, but I also think it creates a responsibility for banks to not take those risks so that they have to be in that situation again in the future. you know, the the subprime crisis was pretty small part of the mortgage Market. it led to a downturn that affected the whole US economy and 10% unemployment. okay, I do have a question, but I going to make a comment first about one thing. you said that I couldn't agree with more about digital currency. when I first kind of learned what digital currency was, I'm like, how is a balance in a bank account in my bank not a digital currency? already I think it is. uh, you know it's. it exists on a ledger, just like a digital currency does. it can be transferred anywhere that you want it to be. I don't get why this needs to exist. just like, just like you were. you were saying, uh, the only I think the answer to your question is what you know, what problem does this solve if I'm a drug dealer or a bad guy, then I love it, but that's the, that's really the only answer to that question is because I need to. I need to keep what I do a secret and that's the only thing. that really, that that really sols. but here's my question. you've said probably the most. the words that you've said the most during this has been: we don't know. um, so, philosophically, if you don't know, you know for sure what has say recently driven inflation, not sure exactly what's going on right now and don't know for sure what's going to happen if you pull certain levers. why, what's the value proposition for the central banks at a very, at the very highest level? why is it a good thing that you're guessing- let's be honest- what it is? what's going to happen if you do this? why should, why shouldn't we take a hypocritic oath and say first, Do no harm, let's do nothing? well, um, it's a fair question if you go back in time. so the, the Federal Reserve is our nation's thirdd attempt at a central bank. Alexander Hamilton created the First Central Bank, the bank of the United, First Bank of the United States, and there last about 20 years they got rid of it. then there was a second Bank in the United States. uh, Andrew Jackson got rid of it. and then a bunch of banking crises hit the US economy in the late 1800s. and then there was the big banking Panic of 1907. and then Congress got together and said: even though we don't like the idea of a central bank because it sounds nefarious, a bunch of bankers in a dark room doing God knows what just doesn't sound like a good thing. so they finally said: well, we have to have a central bank to stop all these banking panics. and so the original purpose of having a central bank is so then, when Banks make mistakes and they're going to, and all of a sudden there's a crisis of confidence, to provide liquidity into the system. you know, we saw this in Co. So Co was remarkable in a lot of ways: the human tragedy, of course. but in the, in the great financial crisis of ' 08, when everybody was scared, everybody ran to treasury bonds for a place of safety. when Co hit, everybody fled all Securities. we didn't know how deadly this virus was, we didn't know how transmissible it was, we didn't know how to treat it, we didn't know if there'd ever be a vaccine, and in that moment of panic. people just wanted cash. and so what does the Federal Reserve do in a moment when fear spreads all the way across the US economy? we flood the banking system with cash and we, in those moments, stabilize the treasury market, stabilize the bond market, stabilize the munity market, stabilized funding markets. so the reason we exist is especially in those moments of Crisis, which unfortunately keep happening. and then, when we're not in crisis environment, what we're trying to do with our monetary policy, polic actions is get the economy back to its balancing position more quickly. you know there are forces in the economy that will self-correct, but they take a long time and can inflict a lot of damage on the way. our hope is that we can get back to this balance soft Landing, quickly, without generating a steep recession or without L allowing inflation to run hot for many, many, many years and have inflation expectations, uh, run out of control. but the the the root reason that central banks exist is because of these times of panic, and if you don't have a central bank standing behind the banking system, history has shown- in those times of panic, everybody pulls their cash out and the banking system collapses. and that's we. that's what the Federal Reserve avoids. my colleague and I are Virginia Bankers that are visiting and we have really enjoyed being in the great maol Island. you just spoke to something I've always wondered, and even if I've, I've wondered if there's any research or if it's just anecdotal from your seat. call it the cares act: what would have happened had that not been passed? you know all of the PPP, all of that flooding that we did to the economy- had that not happened? is there any research being done about what would have happened or do you just have a Just Thoughts? you know I've got thoughts. I'm sure research is being done and I'm sure a lot more research will be done done. if you contrast the recovery from Co and the Deep recession from Co with the recovery from the financial crisis, they could not be more different. the financial crisis: it took a decade for the labor market to recover, to get everybody back to work. responding to covid, it just took a year or two. and then we have very high inflation. so I'm not saying this is right, but I expect uh, economists are going to study this, this and ask the question. you know, maybe the lesson is, if you overdo it, you can have a much stronger labor market recovery at the cost of high inflation or, if you underdo it, you have a very slow labor market recovery that takes 10 years, with very low inflation. now I don't want to attribute the differences entirely to the fiscal responses, but it's, it's a piece of it, and I think that's going to be an open question, which is: hey, is the lesson? do more, maybe not do as much as was done in covid, but don't do as little as was done following the great financial crisis. but we need to understand, because the labor market recovery this time was way better and way faster. is there a way to achieve that without also having the high inflation that came with it? I'm not sure, but I think it's a very important question for us to study going forward. uh, quick question on, uh, the 2% inflation Target. I'm I'm curious like, what's the, the, the impetus or the logic behind that number? it seems like this magic number that you know. how do we get there? how do we make two the number? yeah, it's a good question. it's arbitrary, but most advanced economies have picked the same number. think of it this way: you want a low number that's low enough that people don't have to think about it once we're. you know, before we had this Co, this recent inflation shock. no one t talked about inflation. you just never had to think about it because it was low. and you care? I mean, Central Bankers cared, but nobody else cared. that's really where we want to get back to. so pick a low number that's a little bit above zero. and why a little bit above zero? because we want to avoid deflation. right, as a banker, you know, if you're, if the price of the assets that you're lending against is falling, then the equity is getting wiped out and the debt proportion is just growing bigger and bigger. so deflation is really bad. so let's have a low number that's a little bit above zero. and 2% is where most central banks have said, hey, that feels like the right Balancing Act, but could it be two and a half? could it be one and a half? sure, but let's just pick something low. good morning, I'm Stephanie Kimbell, uh, the chief risk officer for independent bank, and uh, first of all, I've really enjoyed all your comments and the discussion, um, and my question is: you uh outlined a number of ways the FED is supporting the financial industry and our economy, and there's a lot of threats that have to be managed, and so one of the questions I have is: is cyber security one of those threats? now, we used to worry about managing credit. we used to worry about interest rate risk. we still do- but how does the the FED think about that as protecting the financial um industry? uh, absolutely, I mean cyber. first of all, we consider ourselves to be probably the most attractive Target for State actors around the world who want to cause disruptions to the US economy. so we have teams of experts monitoring our, our own cyber defenses for our wire transfers and all of our accounts, Etc, to protect, uh, the FED systems. so that's one very important activity and we never feel like we're doing enough, but we're watching, uh vigilantly. and then we also have experts within our supervisory area to make sure that banks are taking appropriate action to make sure banks have the information that they need on what they should be doing, and what we've seen is, um, uh, the the bad guys want to attack one. they want to attack high value targets and they want to attack easy targets, and you know where they can get. maybe they're not going to get as much money, but they'll have some progress because they'll probably be an easier Target to attack, and so we've seen many examples where small Banks did not have sophisticated defenses and were exploited um, causing real disruption to those Banks and their customers, and so it's something we take very seriously as Bank supervisors and we want to be partners with the industry. I both to supervise but also to make sure that industry has access to the expertise that they need. I mean, these are very complicated topics, very hard for a small Bank to have the resources internally to know what to do, and we want to help however we can to try to protect against these threats. so it's unfortunately, it's a reality for all of us and it's unfortunately not going away and probably getting harder and worse every year. so you, you've talked about many threats to the banking industry and I'm wondering where you put the credit union industry on that list, or if you have, or what you think about the credit union industry that is buying up Banks, changing those assets into non- taxable assets, and whether or not the growth in the industry is on the radar of the Fed. so it's on the radar of the FED because Community Banks mention this to me quite often. so I know I I would just say you know this is a, this is the domain of legislators and you know you all are not shy, nor should you be, and you should express your views. it's not, it's not. there's nothing the FED can do. so this is really the domain of legislators to decide, uh, what, how they feel about these different markets and the roles they serve and the regulations that apply to both, and whether it's a Level Playing Field. and so I hear you, I understand uh your concerns and I would just say: you know, talk to your elected officials about, uh, these different, uh, these different situations. I'm I'm not trying to be flippant, I'm just being honest, like it's a, it's a, it's a legislative matter. so somebody give tell me- I'm gonna ask you questions now- what's happening in your economies? what are you seeing? what's your outlook like? hold on, a microphone's going to come to you. a microphone's going to come to you. so the population of Michigan has declined by a small amount, by a small amount- since 2004. so we're headquartered in an arbor, which is one of the strongest regions of Michigan, but even in our County, jobs are down and population is down 2% over the last three years. uh, I'm friends with Gretchen Whitmer. I have her cell phone. I call her anytime I want. she made some major mistakes during the pandemic which have dramatically impacted the state, continue to impact the state in a negative way. so I think, um, Russ Daniel Independent Bank, I think we're seeing that we're starting to see some impact of the uh Rising rates in terms of a little bit impact on employment and little bit of impact on inflation, and so, in my view, companies are slowing down. maybe they're they're purchasing and their expansion plans and that kind of stuff. um, I think the engineering of soft Landing is going to be an interesting thing to watch, um, because as employment slows, delinquencies pick up, and once it picks up momentum it's hard to turn it the other way. so we're kind of guardedly optimistic that we might be able to get there. but employment has been more stable for us in our customer base than anticipated and that's where we are still not seeing the delinquencies we would expect, which would show us that it's moving in that direction. so so far you have not seen the uptick and delinquencies. no, now I think we've changed our credit standards substantially from the Great Recession, so it might be that we have not gone as deep in the credit bucket and I think in the prior presentation we saw subprime and and lower um credit score, delinquency starting to pick up. yeah, so we'll see where it goes from there. I I did have a question for you. I we talk about the political side and we talk about monetary policy. I think the biggest challenge for us is the administrative policy and we talk about the cfpb and regulations for the large Banks. those aren't regulations for the large banks in our view, because even in our fed exams, those regulations trickle down to the community panks and the enforcement and management of that is very difficult. anything thoughts on how you enhance the Community Bank side versus continuing to tighten on the large or regulatory side, which has a trickle down effect. yeah, I mean, we have these discussions with our supervisors all the time about, uh, you know, wanting to make sure that supervision of Community Banks is appropriate, is not needlessly burdensome, uh, where we're making sure everybody's following the rules but doing it in an efficient manner. uh, we're, we're keenly interested in doing this too, and so we're always you, we have, we have- advisory groups that give us feedback. Roxanne's on one of them. uh, on you know what's going well, what's not going well, so that we can fine-tune our practices. we know that Community Banks are not going to bring down the US economy right. the risk of Community Banks is much, much lower than the risk of the giant Banks, and so we are very we're aligned, at least conceptually, in wanting to have different levels of scrutiny depending on where the risks lie. I'm not um naive enough to suggest that we always get it right, but we are. we do want to get it right, and so I would just say: keep speaking up. if you see us doing things that you think are are needless or silly, you know, tell us so we can look at it and examine our own practices. but we are at least in spirit aligned with what you're saying. thank you for being here today. um, Matthew Keane, Citizens National Bank, just right here in northern Michigan. you asked about how the econom is doing and I. we all see each other's car reports and for the most part you know delinquencies are non-existent. nobody's seeing pain in the balance sheet at this point beyond your unrealized loss that you're everybody's kind of working their themselves through. I think a lot of that is um, in part because we're still the, the government is still spending money. there's a huge gluttony of cash that still has to be spent. I think most of us are going to see a fine summer and even going into the end of the year, I think we're going to be okay. my concern comes, uh, first quarter next year, when we've maybe moved out through a lot of the spending that has to be done. so I will be. I'm not expecting you to do any kind of rate adjustments between now, maybe even the first quarter of next year. it's kind of where my head's going, because we're going to have stimulus moving through the system, no matter where it's spent. it does trickle through everything we do. so it'll be. my curiosity will be if you decide to start moving rates lower in anticipation of all the money being gone and hitting the wall. that that's the thing I'm most concerned by is I think we're going to be okay till we're not, and it's going to be not like immediate, and so I think that that's going to be. one of the things I'm looking for on your forecasting is when that money is kind of done being spent. can you start making moves in advance of that waiting? so it maybe helps with that softer Landing. so I think for the most part we're all going to be fine the rest of the year. I think it's going to be in 25 when you could see it just just not working. so thoughts that way, thank you. final question- or not a question, just a response to your question of what we're seeing in the marketplace. I was talking to a banker earlier this morning, uh, who was seeing some significant changes in where their credit card uh spending of their customers was taking place and they've seen a pretty dramatic shift from regular market area spending to more discount level spending and more shopping at Walmart, where there was not before, and some other Trends. so we are seeing that kind of Click out and would anticipate that to follow kind of your projections over the this next year. got it, yeah, and I'm I'm hearing similar anecdotes of, uh you know, people trading down lower cost stores, lower cost uh items to try to save some money. so thank you for that. I appreciate it. thank you so much, Neil. it was great to have you today. I've always known you to be open and honest and today is no exception. so thank you so much. thank you very much, appreciate it.