https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-at-the-barclays-cepr-international-monetary-policy-forum-2024

Neel Kashkari at the Barclays-CEPR International Monetary Policy Forum 2024

May 28, 2024

London, England

Neel Kashkari

[Applause] uh, good afternoon. thank you, uh, for inviting me. it's great to be here with all of you, uh and uh to see my friends again. we met at Jackson Hall. uh, it's great to see you again, Claus. um, I'm going to start with some. some of my comments are obviously going to be very close to uh, my colleague from the ecb's comments, because there's some parallels in our relative monetary policies and our relative inflation stories, but there's some differences too. um, let me start with a disclaimer, which is I'm required to give you that these comments reflect my own views and not necessarily others at the Federal Reserve. so let's look at the chart of? uh. I guess I have to hit it again. chart of inflation, uh looks very similar. if you look on the chart on the left, you see 12-month headline in core inflation. uh, in the United States we were very surprised by the high inflation on the way up, but then we were very surprised on the rapid disinflation on the way down last year. uh, on the right you can see the unemployment rate. this was also a surprise to us is how low the unemployment rate has stayed even though we have aggressively raised interest rates to try to tap the breakes on demand and bring inflation down. so the second half of last year was a surprise on both fronts: rapid disinflation, and yet while many Market participants and many at the FED expected a slowing and maybe even a recession in the second half of last year, that recession didn't happen. instead, GDP remained very strong, consumption remained very strong and the labor market remained very strong. I travel around our, our part of America. I represent What's called the ninth Federal Reserve District, which is a a big chunk of the center of the country. I talked to a lot of businesses, large and small. they say that the labor market has softened relative to where it was a year ago or two, two years ago, when it was very, very hot. but it's still a tight labor market. businesses are still having to work hard to find the workers that they need. wage growth has come down, but wage growth is still quite uh robust relative to, ultimately, what we think would be consistent with the 2% inflation Target. so looking ahead, um, at the next slide, this is some of the same data. but looking at monthly data and then the- the red bars are the six-month average- you can see in the second half of last year that third bar, 2.3% inflation. it looked as though we were done. it looked as though, if this trend of the second half of last year continues, we have achieved the proverbial soft Landing: getting inflation essentially all the way back down to our 2% inflation Target while maintaining a very strong labor market. that would be a almost a miraculous outcome that had never been achieved in monetary policy history. so at the end of last year we were all feeling quite optimistic, but we were still, uh, reserving judgment. we did not want to declare Victory too soon. and then, of course, the beginning of this year. so far, you can see that that core inflation has ticked back up to around a 3% level, and that has us now, um, scratching our heads a little bit to understand. is the this inflationary process still on track? is it just slowed down and this is just a bump, or is it stalled out? are we essentially Landing softly, but at around a 3% inflation level, instead of all the way back down to our 2% inflation level? if you look ahead at the- this is the federal funds rate path- the red dots are that what we call the summary of economic projections. once a quarter, the Federal Reserve fomc puts out a collection of individual participant forecasts. those are the median dots as of March. uh, and you can see, the expectation is for rate cuts to come as we get closer to achieving our 2% inflation Target. most of my colleagues have commented publicly in the last couple months saying, hey, given the inflation that we have seen, we need to just pause here, take our time, get more data before we determine when it would be appropriate to cut interest rates. I've been asked many times: would we take potential interest rate increases off the table? I don't think anybody has formally taken them off the table, even even me. uh, I say that we could sit here for as long as necessary until we get convinced that inflation is sustainably going back down to our 2% Target. I'm not ruling out potential interest rate increases from here, but I think sitting where we are for an extended period of time is a more likely outcome. but of course, if we get surprised by the data, then we would do what we need to do. the commitment for the committee to get inflation all the way back down to our 2%- there's no deviation around the table. the only deviation is our outlooks for what's happening happening, the underlying inflationary Dynamics. so this period has been very hard to explain. it's been hard to explain because inflation fell faster than we expected in the second half of last year, but then it flattened out. real, the real economy GDP has been remarkably resilient in the US. uh, consumption has been remarkably resilient in the US. the labor market has been remarkably resilient in the US and the biggest heads scratcher for me is the sector of the US economy that should be most sensitive to interest rate increases, which is the housing market, has been far more resilient than expected. housing investment, real investment- has been maintained. there's been a Slowdown in housing starts and in housing sales, but the overall housing market has been remarkably resilient. you know, us mortgage rates have gone up to about 7, 7 and a half% for 30-year mortgages. uh, by recent history those are quite high levels and yet there seems to be resilience in the housing market. so we've got- we've gotten very detailed in to try to track where rents are going- new leases- we know that leases take a year or two to turn over and they can be a forward indicator of where underlying housing inflation is going. even recently, new leases have started ticking back up again, which is quite surprising if monetary policy is in a very restriction stance. so a question that I've been asking my colleagues and I'll ask all of you is: how tight is US monetary policy right now? and this is related to a concept that we all spent a lot of time thinking about, which is the neutral rate, or what we call shorthand R star? uh, and how do we put all of this together to judge whether or not policy is restrictive? I'm going to argue that I think by most measures it seems that us monetary policy is restrictive, but not by all measures, and I'm I'm open to the possibility that the short run neutral rate, or the the neutral rate, may have gone up, at least temporarily. now. big picture: longterm, we think these neutral rates are set by broader macroeconomic factors, such as demographics and productivity growth. we know the demographic Trends in the US. we're an aging society, as is much of the western world, so that probably hasn't changed. maybe productivity has gone up temporarily. it's hard to imagine that AI is already having an imprint- a sustainable imprint- in the economy. so my best guess is, once we get through these transitionary dynamics of the reopening of the economy, we're going to end up in a neutral rate. that something look something like the prior neutral rate before the pandemic. but could it be that in this reopening economy, for some reason the neutral rate has temporarily gone up? let's have a look at that. so how do I assess the overall stal monetary policy? we have, as I calculated, we have four distinct but related policy tools. we have the federal funds rate, we have the path of the federal funds rate, we have the balance sheet and the path of the balance sheet. forward guidance is a very powerful policy tool. all of those go together to affecting long rate, long rates. so while we central banks move the short rate overnight rate up and down, short rates are not what actually determine investment activity. it's long rates that determine, and we believe, long re rates. so if you put all that together, these are long re rates. the 10year tips right before the pandemic, you could see, if you can see the um. there's the light gray line there. that's the brief recession in the US. right before the pandemic, the 10year tips was at about zero, which at that moment I judge which is roughly a neutral overall stance of policy. then the pandemic hit. the Federal Reserve expanded its balance sheet, we cut the federal funds rate to zero and we drove the 10year tips to about minus 100 basis points. so that in my judgment that represents the stimulus that monetary policy was applying to the economy, minus 100 basis points at the 10year level. since then we've obviously raised rates aggressively and now the 10year tips is up a little north of two: 210, 220 basis points. so if you believe me that before the pandemic, zero represented neutral, we're now at a plus 200 level- 210, 220- that would suggest policy is certainly in a contractionary stance. okay, so far, so good. now let's look relative to history. another way I try to get a sense of how tight is policy is the yield curve in the US. there's a lot of attention given to uh inverted yield curves. inverted yield Curves in the US have been a pretty good predictor of recession. um, setting aside its usefulness as a recession forecaster, I think it gives us some indication of where policy is relatively neutral, because the long end of the curve is not only set by the Central Bank. the long end of the curve is also embedded in that our Market participants own expectations of where neutral is. so if the short rate is higher than the long rate, one could say, okay, that is a proxy for uh we're, that we're in a contractionary policy stance. or to say in another way. if the neutral rate has gone up, you would expect the long end of the curve to have gone up and therefore we would have to go even higher on the front end to achieve an inverted yield curve. so you can see the various inversions. those are the blue lines. the point of this chart is to say the yield curve by most measures is quite inverted today relative to history, and it's been inverted for a while. so that also would suggest that, hey, policy probably is in a contractionary stance. but the head, the head scratcher, is: look at the economy. uh, consumption has been remarkably resilient throughout this period. uh, I said earlier, housing has been remarkably resilient throughout this period. uh, the labor market has been remarkably resilient. where is the imprint of this tight monetary policy on the real economy? that's where it is harder to see. and then, finally, this is an expectations of where inflation is likely headed. using bluechip uh forecast right now, the, the expectations are that inflation is going to Trend sideways for the foreseeable future. we need to get inflation all the way back down to our 2% inflation Target. we're all committed to doing so. but given how much uncertainty there is in my mind about how contractionary policy is and what the underlying trend for inflation is. that tells me that it's best for us to sit here for as long as necessary until we get clarity on that fundamental question. the good news is the labor market- the other side of our dual mandate, is very strong. so if the underlying economy is strong, the labor market is strong. we have the luxury of taking our time to assess how much downward pressure we are putting on demand. so with that, uh, I look forward to our discussion. good afternoon, Professor rlin. president, Kari, president not, thank you very much for your introductory remarks, which were so excellent that I wonder what are we going to discuss now in the panel? so I'm Sylvia is Christian Keller introduced me, I had the European economics research at bar and in this panel I'm also joined by my colleague, Mark janoni, who had the US economy. now, in your remarks you uh highlighted with great clarity and depth what are the shortterm, the medium-term issues, both for economic activity, for inflation, for, um, for the challenges of monetary policy in the future. so let me start, Maybe, with the landing Zone, Landing Zone in terms of growth and in terms of inflation, and let's uh, you, you sort of like- spoke about your base cases, president kascar and president, not uh, let's start perhaps a bit with the tail risks. so, uh, a year ago, as you all said, given the size and given the speed and the synchronicity of, uh, the tightness in monetary policy, we were all entertaining the uh possibility that the price to pay to bring back inflation to 2% was going to be an economic recession with some increase in unemployment, and we are very happy that that obviously did not materialize. but, on the other hand, inflation, particularly in the US, is not yet close to Target. so let me start with you, president kasari, and my question is: uh, given the extent of the monetary tightening, you have been very positive on the Outlook of the US economy, but can we be confident that the transmission of monetary policy is at Peak and there is absolutely no risk of a hard landing? and if so, why is said that? well, I certainly would never say there's no risk of a hard Landing. but I asked this question. of businesses that I talked to a lot, I say: do you see evidence that there's a lot of tightening that's built up that is yet to be felt? most businesses say to me: no, they don't see evidence of that now. one place, of course, could be the housing market, because if you look at the gap between what new mortgage rates are and the average mortgage rates that Americans are paying, there's a big gap there because many, many Americans refinance their mortgages at very low rates during the pandemic. so that's, that's one source of lag, but that's not new to the US economy. you know, 30-year mortgages have been around for a long time in the US economy, so why would this, why would this tightening cycle have longer lags than most? it's hard for me to understand that. it seems like that's. that's just a feature, so I don't want to rule it out that, um, there still could be economic costs to come. we certainly hope not, but we also know we have to get inflation all the way back down. great president, not. what do you think about it for the Euro area? is there still a risk of a hard Ling or you're pretty confident that we are off the hook? well, I, I mean that risk, at least for the short to medium term. I don't. uh, I think it is uh, receding quite rapidly. uh, I must say, of course we have had essentially 4 to five quarters of stagnation. I mean, we've avoided recession, but the growth performance has clearly been far from from Stellar uh in, uh in in in the Euro area, but I do think that if you look at the Soft Data, they are clearly uh, yeah, uh predicting the recovery to take place. I think if you look at the Hard data, the q1 was slightly better than expected. the reasons to be optimistic about the rest of the year and next year is that I think, due to this staggered uh wage Contracting that we have in Europe, there has been a delay within which uh real wages have recovered after the big uh inflation shock. but 2024 is clearly a year of recovery in purchasing power. I mean it. it is crystal clear that the wage contracts that have been concluded last year that are still concluded at the moment, all have wage growth numbers that significantly exceed the inflation uh rates that we still have. so I think it it will be the recovery in purchasing power, which is a delayed one, but nonetheless it will take place during the remainder of the year and that's why I think there will be an acceleration of growth in the uh- or at least it's reasonable to assume an acceleration of growth in the second half of the year and then toward uh Trend growth in uh in in 2025. now there is still, of course, the longer run issue. what is Trend growth in the Euro area? what is productivity growth in the Euro area? there's a demand component to that. I think there's a cyclical element in there, but there may also be a structural element that has to do with flexibility of markets, Etc. why productivity growth lacks so much, for instance, productivity growth in the US. I think that's that's clearly one of the question that we want to discuss and we're going to get there on the structural differences between the Euro area and the US. um, I think it would be. um Luc, at the very beginning, you, uh, you said these are the questions for the policy makers. there are many ideas of why we have not seen the hard Landing, but I'm sure that our audience would also love to hear from you, at least in your mind, what could be a plausible story, why we have not seen a hard Landing yet and whether we actually could not seen it in the next few months. I must admit, like many other people, if you had asked me that question last year, I would have been much more pessimistic about the real economy. that, uh. so you know, we are all pleasantly surprised, but, uh, I mean I want to stress that the US and the Euro area are, you know, the performance are quite different. we have stagnation and, uh, we had a very uh, you know, I I show you some the data on investment. so I think that, uh, if I am allowed to think a little bit out of the box, I would say: are we really sure that such staff stance, monetary and fiscal in our case, you know, that's the difference also with the US- is not really also having some long-term nonneutral effect? and this was one of the theme of of my provocator remarks. because you know monetary, uh, in Central Banking, people think that you know monetary policy T not to have such long-term effect. but are we so sure? okay, aren't we penalizing investment? aren't we penalizing, uh, you know, investment, in particular in some key sectors of our economy which are very sensitive to financial conditions. so I, to me this would be like a big question to, to ask, um, and then about the lags. I think I find this quite intriguing. I I just came from a from a conference at the Atlanta fed where John Campbell has some interesting remarks on the nature of the housing market to explain, you know, the transmission in the US. um, there is also some intriguing results from thecb. talking about the effect of uh. you know, ample liquidity in uh in maybe delaying some effect, but I find this harder to believe. that definitely something to research, at least for what is worth. we are also painting a much more positive scenario now for the second half of the year, maybe a Le little bit less positive than the ECB does and would say clearly: uh, you know the, the. the pick up in growth rate that we expect in second half of the year is certainly also linked to some monetary easing. but it's also true that we are all hoping in the consumption to Rebound in the Euro area. but so far the hard data does not seems to suggest much of that, at least in q1. for where we have the split, it has been more investment or or net trade rather than really a big consumption Bo. but over to mark for the first round of question. and where do we see the risk on the US? so under I mean first on looking back, uh 20, you know, 2023. I think it made a lot of sense to expect a slowing in the economy, as the Fed was, you know, on on track to raise rates by, you know, over 500 basis points. um, we did see in 22 some slowing the housing market but that, as you mentioned before, that was only temporary. then that, it, it, it got strong again. I think the the for us uh. last year we saw increasingly resilience in the US economy, especially in the second half of last year when that that was driven mostly by the consumer, we think right. so consumer um still benefits from a pretty good financial situation. overall household net worth is still quite strong um and, importantly, we think that the, the household benefits very much from a very robust labor market which you know, month after month generates uh over2 200 ,000 jobs- I mean last month was 175,000, but roughly 200,000 jobs uh- and with that generating a lot of income. and with each of this added income, you know, you generate uh consumption uh. households spend about 97% of that disposable income every month and so that keeps consumption going and keeps the economy going. so we think this has been the MJ uh main source of uh, of momentum in the economy. so, looking ahead, we think we are still going going to have some uh, some momentum coming from that uh. we see some deceleration on the consumption side. uh. obviously there are some cracks uh coming up every now and then, like on the uh delinquency rates, for instance on credit card, autol loan, but overall the consumer is still in very good, good shape. so I wouldn't excl, as president Kashkari said, I don't think we can ever exclude a recession or a sharp downturn, but the fundamentals still seem pretty strong to uh to prevent. but what you described to something I call I- I saw this, some evidence of this a couple years ago- that it seemed like, just like you said, the labor market was strong, people were earning money, they were spending money and, in a sense, the flywheel is self-perpetuating. what I call that is a high press equilibrium, but it's a high pressure equilibrium that's not consistent with 2% inflation, right, and that means it's up to the Federal Reserve to then bring that equilibrium back down to a level that's consistent with 2% inflation. because we were looking- many people were looking- very carefully at the what we call excess savings that was accumulated during the pandemic. when would that get spent down? once it's spent down, consumers will return to normal. there's some measures that that's been spent down for many people, but consumption is remaining robust. the savings rate is still lower than it was prior to the pandemic, and so it looks like that equilibrium can continue for the foreseeable future. I think that's one of the difference between Europe and the US. right, that's exactly a point that was still on my mind. if you look at the financial health of the European consumer, only 40%, we estimate, of the involuntary savings that they accumulated during the pandemic have been spent. so that's the reason why I'm optimistic that recovery and purchasing power will also mean recovering and consumption. there's absolutely no need to restore any sort of uh savings deficit. and while I would be careful not to use the words high pressure economy for the Euro area, the labor market in the Euro area has also held up well, right, I mean, unemployment is still at its uh, its record low, so we have not had meaningful damage to the labor market and uh, and that that combined makes me optimistic that indeed the money uh will uh will be spent. I mean, of course, the better performance of the labor market in the Euro area probably is one of the reasons why we have this mediocre productivity growth and the labor hoarding story. uh, which has its disadvantages when you look at at at productivity, but of course it has advantages in taking out consumer uncertainties. yeah, we totally agree, I guess so we. it's the Baseline of all of us, but it is also true, I think, that unfortunately perhaps is the war is the big energy shock- that consumers in the Euro area remain pretty cautious, confidence has improved but not that much, and that you know this. this increasing real wages has happened in some countries, not in others, and I guess, as you suggest going forward, that is the Bas case that we all expect um in terms of investment. I think Luca was pointing out the tightness in financing conditions and perhaps we can jump there and discuss a little bit what the monetary policy um outlook for the near term. um is um in uh, you know in general um, you, you have shown from from your slide, president, not, that when you look at the decompositions of inflation, uh, There is almost no more positive contribution from the demand side right, and what is left seems to be particularly driven by Supply. you also shown that the real interest rate Gap is um, is above zero, and you seems to have. you know you and also your, your colleague on the governing Council, have hinted various time right that the first rate high cut from the ECB could be quite imminent. now I I found it very interesting what you said in your presentation also related to, uh, the fact that some data released only quarterly and so forecast meeting becomes very important for decision. I guess the question in the mind of everybody here is: there is a a difference between decision and action, right, when you make a decision based on a forecast, say June, right, and then you know that between June and July you have a very limited amount of data that might be released. what is, in terms of strategies, that, for example, makes the ECB very confident about? you know, flagging that if the new projection are in line with the March ones, uh, a cut in June is on the cards, but it does not. the same set of projection does not instill any confidence in wanting to provide any guidance for the July meeting. after all, when you are so distant from the neutral rate, as you showed with your real interest rate Gap, what one could learn in the span of a few weeks? that would make you analyze the economy in a different way. well, I think what also should be kept in mind is that our projections are conditional upon a market implied path for the policy rate, right. so if you have projections that are roughly converged toward your 2% Target and, as the council, you agree that the balance of risk around these projections is is roughly equal, uh, no tilt in the up or in the downside. then in a mechanical way. of course policy is never made in a mechanical way, but in a mechanical way- you don't want to move away too far from Market expectations. right, because exactly validating Market expectations would then precisely feed into your projections that produce the 2% uh Target. that type of exercise you only do once a quarter. of course, if there are significant ific deviations in your projection from your inflation Target, then you could also at the beginning of a quarter say: well, maybe we need to do 50 basis points and we do 25 today, but implicitly H, We Stand ready to do 25 also at an interim meeting. so data dependence and meeting by meeting means that all meetings are open uh and all meetings are in principle uh in play. but the amount of rate cuts, of course uh is something to be determined by the uh, the governing Council. but we do take into account what goes into the projections and where sort of the projections relate relative to our 2% Target and the sort of balanced risk uh around it. president kasar, the situation for the FED seems completely opposite. you were uh actually hinting to the fact that, um, policy restrictive, but you would not rule out a rate hike, and that there might be a set of circumstance that PB don't make it don't, you know, would suggest along the way that perhaps is not that restrictive. now I think our question for us is if you can elaborate a little bit more on what criteria you might consider- or you know you have in your mind- to basically decides whether policy is sufficiently restrictive or not, what, what it is that would make you comfortable to say we have to remain on hold for a longer period of time, whether, considering the scenario in which you might have to increase policy rates further to bring inflation to Target. I mean, let me just um, if I wasn't uh clear, I think the odds of us raising rates are quite low, but I don't want to take anything off the table. uh, much more likely we would sit where we are. so we have a. as you all know, the FED has officially a dual mandate: stable prices and maximum employment. if the labor market remains quite strong and inflation essentially moves sideways, then I could see us sitting here for an indefinite period of time until we get convinced that disinflation is in fact on hand and there just lags are longer than we had appreciated. but in that time we might also conclude, hey, policy is actually not restrictive enough, the disinflationary process is not, uh, on its way, and there that would be the situation where we would potentially have to go up again. I don't think it's very likely, but it's, I can't rule it out. I think the more difficult scenario is if inflation moves sideways and we start seeing some real weakness in the labor market. then we have to end up trading off the two sides of our dual mandate we have. we've said we would take a balanced approach in that case, but we've never defined exactly what a balanced approach means. I mean, I think the 19 participants in the F fomc would probably have 19 different interpretations of what that balanced approach means and we'd have to look at the bulk of the data. you know, one question I I give I was at a conference like this a few weeks ago in the US and Market participants would come up to me and say: why do you guys at the FED keep saying Financial conditions are tight? they're not tight and I'm curious, meaning we think a a 10year US Treasury rate of 4 and a half% ballpark. all other credit and borrowing is priced off of that. you would say that's a tight, that should be tight financing conditions. but Market participants are saying no, the financial markets in the US are open, those are, they're telling me those are not tight Financial conditions. I'm curious: in the Euro Zone, do you all feel like these are tight Financial conditions for Euro Zone borrowers? I think I mean obviously Our Guest can can offer you also their perspective later. I think when we look at the data from the Euro Zone, from our side, we find that Financial conditions are very tight, or maybe financing conditions, meaning that I mean Europe is a much more Bank Centric. and when we look at all the credit data, the data on volumes, the data on interest rate- average interest rate, not just the marginal which seems to be coming down- we find in the data that clearly one, the average cost of borrowing is still going up and then credit volumes have basically remain La cluster or or flat or zero since the beginning of the year. there are some interesting survey data also where s where, like the io, for example, um um Institute run a survey data to German companies asking why they were investing so little and they were mentioning also. you know the, the financial, um, I mean cost of capital, the, the ECB Bank Landing survey also show that. but you know, I'm sure that uh- I don't know whether this is this view- is uh, um, obviously shared by the policy makers and um. well, I mean again, I showed the slide where I tried to depict the deviation of real rates from uh, the model estimates of of rstar, which showed that in terms of tightness there was not so much difference between the US and uh and and the Euro area if you zoom in on different aspects of uh Financial conditions. the Netherlands- we are a a country with a lot of Mortgage Debt. uh Mortgage Debt is financed fixed term, so the 10year mortgage interest rate is quite an important and transmission uh variable in in the Netherlands. before December 21 it was 1 and a half% uh. in December 21 we started announcing the tapering of the QE and implying that after that rates would be increased. already in the first half of 21 the 10year mortgage rate came up to roughly four, 4 and a half%. it's there still today. so it has not tightened any further uh since, let's say, the summer of 22 when we really started raising the policy rate and the housing market is taking off again. it has had a small sort of pause and it it continues to increase. so in my country I do not find it easy to say that monetary policy is actually very tight if I look at at that specific uh part. but you're right and you're right that on investment, it has been visible that at least corporate borrowing rates have probably been one of the factors that have been uh withholding investment. now I do think that there is also a first GL glimpse of, let's say, relatively better news there in the in the q1 data. but that is something that of course we will have to see, because I also agree that we need a lot of investments in Europe to meet the sort of longer term uh challenges. Professor R, you mentioned in your slides that part of your work for the Geneva report basically led to the implication that uh don't kill too fast this inflationary shock to allow the relative price change to happen and reduce the welfare cost. when you look as of today at the Euro area, the us or the UK, where would you say that perhaps monetary policy uh has not let enough time to kill uh this, this relative price adjustment, this to happen? well, I've been a very much of a dove since the very beginning, but I'm Italian so I had to be excused. right, uh, I, I agree that, uh, I mean, the mechanism is quite clear. I think that, uh, you know that, uh, you know, in monetary policy people used to think that uh, um, you know, relative price changes, uh are inefficient, but actually there are situation in which they are actually efficient, that we, the economy, have to adjust and demand has to- uh, you know to, so there has to be reallocation. uh, it is not clear you know what that actually means in terms of empirically, what that means, and I wish there was more research on that. but it's an example of uh, of the kind of shocks that we have just experienced, which, at least in Europe, was mostly a supply shock. the mechanism, including the relative price adjustment, calls for, you know, for a response that, uh, you know, has to taken into consideration the cost of uh, of going to, to to the inflation Target too fast, and I think the future will be more and more of these examples and in that sense, uh, uh, there is also research that show that if you take a, you know, an optimal inflation or perspective when there are large changes in the trend of relative prices. maybe the optimal inflation should be a bit higher than 2%. there is work by Claus Adam on Micro Data, on UK data and uh and and on Italian data. of course this is a very difficult topic and I understand, you know, that you cannot change the Target in the middle of the fire, but definitely for the medium run this should be a topic that should be addressed. I mean, I show you the vuler numbers that for, uh, you know, 15 years inflation was 3.5, 4% and nobody was weing too much. okay, so that, uh, you know, inflation expectation stabilized although, oh, you know so, the implicit Target was higher at the time. there must be lots of reasons, but you know, talking about to the US, I mean, is it a big deal that if inflation stabilize at 2.5, rather two, um, you know what are the cost of that deviation, to the extent that inflation expectations are stable, Mark, you and your team, from the very beginning, I would say November last year, when we wrote our year ahead Outlook, you had a view that the FED would have cut policy rates much less that the market was pricing. you have held to that view for quite a long time. uh, and then, after a short Liv, I say detour. uh, then you went back to your conviction and now you expect the FED to cut policy rates only once this year. I mean, that's a big gap relative to what we expect in Europe, where we expect three Cuts this year, both from the ECB and the bank of England. but for you now, where is the risk? is it more likely that the fat will not cut or that we cut twice in 24, and why? well, so, as you alluded to to, I guess, as part of the job, I have to put down a forecast for the economy, for inflation, and for and for rates and um and um, not being in the mind of the policy makers, but trying to think of how the policy makers are going to be, uh, confronting. uh, the data. uh, given this resilience that we see in the in activity and um, in the consumer in particular, um, still solid activity on the housing side as well. um, we think that the F, it will be very difficult for the FED to cut more than once this year. so our Baseline, as you alluded to, is just one one rate cut this year. um, in terms of the timing, it's a difficult one. I think it depends very, very closely on um, um, on the inflation Prospect, assuming also that the- you know the economy doesn't suddenly slow uh sharply. this is again not part of our Baseline um, but if inflation gradually comes down, uh in in the next couple of months, uh. so we'll have like a May reading at a you know, around a0, 2 for for uh, rounding down to0, 2 for core PC inflation, rounding down also to 02 for in June um and then around 02 in in uh in July and close to that in August. then we think that the FED might be able to cut um as early as as September. but even there I think we don't have too much conviction. we think that it's easy for the inflation to be slightly stronger than that, in which case case they would likely postpone uh the time until they they they get with the first cut, and that would be in December then. so where are the risks around that? I think the risk are still to the upside in my, in my view, uh, just because again this goes back to the consumer- as long as we see the consumer being in overall good shape and the labor market being overall strong- and you alluded to what you hear in your District about, uh, from your uh, the employers there and and still, you know, seeing the labor market as tight. um, we think that this can sustain for for a while and it's going to make it difficult for the FED to cut more than once. in that context, please, class. just, I've been thinking a little bit LCA about some of the comments you make. um, I mean, suppose that the scenario unfolds, that is in our projections, and we would sort of be sustainably we at 2% inflation in the mid of 2025. then we would have had four years of uh elevated above 2% inflation. normally, monetary policy works with a lack of one and a half to two years. our medium term is roughly Associated Etc. so what we have tedly implicitly been doing is, of course, extending out, yeah, the medium term. in the phase of the shock, I think that was also one of your remedies on on, on the slide. now you can have a debate on whether extending the medium-term by another year right would, would have been better in terms of lower cost. I would just say that I'm happy that inflation expectations have continued to be well anchored, but there have been moments in which I thought they are just about anchored there. the five year, five year, at 2.65. these are the moments in which- so I do T it's, of course, a counter effectual discussion, we never know- but I do believe that had we taken more time explicitly, we might have run a risk of of inflation, uh expectations drifting away from us. and if I then look at the, the, the real cost in terms of sacrifice ratio, in terms of the labor market, it's hardly been there, right, uh, I mean no run up in, in, in unemployment and finally a higher inflation Target, I think, uh, I'm definitely not in favor of it. but the main reason is that after the 1970s we had to so painstakingly get rid of all these automatic indexation Clauses in the economy. that creates a lot of rigidity, Etc. if we settle for a higher inflation Target, at some point the rational attentiveness to inflation comes back into the picture and uh, what you will get? Alum ler, I think, was quoted once as saying that there is price stability when nobody talks about inflation. at some moment, when inflation becomes permanently 3% rather than 2%, at some point people will pay: uh, attention, you will get automatic indexation Clauses, Etc. and in my view that would only impose even more rigidity on the supply side of the Euro area economy. yeah, let me answer to. well, I think that actually this is exactly what you did, so you implicitly lengthen the Horizon of the flexible inflation targeting. so very good, and for the future, I think it would be good to see some you know real concept and some you know behind that idea, because I think it's a very powerful idea and it is really the essence of flexible inflation targeting that you want to, you know, adjust the Horizon in relation to the cost and in terms of the level of inflation targeting, which would be another way to do it. I don't think you should change it now, but in in a, actually in a report of the, in a kind of reaction to your strategy review, we wrote with another bunch of economists that it would be good to have a system in which, exante, you revise it in, you know, but giving you know the date for the revision, exante, because of course everybody understand that you cannot do it when inflation is high and uh, and the reason is that you know 2% is relatively arbitrary, so we know that it is. we know that it cannot be 10 because otherwise we have the indexation spirals of the 70s, but between two and three, you know, you can. you can see that 3% is not the end of you know. so why not 3%? okay so, and it's not 3%? because you have a Target at 2% and so it should be 2% and you should adjust the Horizon. that's that would be my recommendation. but, you know, I think for the future, especially if you think that there will be other shocks of the kind that we have experienced, I think we would be good, as you know, to have some kind of uh concept for revision on regular basis. great, I think. so far, we have spoken a lot about interest rates, but we have not mentioned balance sheet policies. those are also part of the picture. yeah, so on that topic, I mean, I guess president Kar the, the, the, the FC, announced a change to uh to the rundown of the of its balance sheet at the last meeting. um, is that? can you tell us a little bit of like what's underlying that decision, how that relates to the policy St and maybe any insights about you know, when do you expect this to to end? or if, if, any? well, we, um, the Federal Reserve, successfully shrunk its balance sheet after their great financial crisis. we, it grew very large and then we went through a period of quantitative tightening. we did that successfully. uh, We Shrunk it a little bit too much, because the demand for reserves continues to climb and we weren't exactly sure. we were surveying Banks about, uh, how many reserves that they would need to get to this ample regime that we are trying to operate under, and it turned out the demand for reserves was somewhat higher than what banks were reporting to us. so we were surprised. this is in the fall of 2019. we saw some volatility in funding markets and then the Federal Reserve had to intervene to provide more reserves into the financial system. uh, and then begin growing our balance sheet again at a through normal, uh, through normal processes. so then we expanded it again during QE and now we've been shrinking it. now we've been shrinking it at twice the rate we shrank at last time. so it's been a very rapid runoff and all we've now done is said: let's go slow the runoff, back to the runoff Pace, essentially, that we had during the last quantitative tightening period. so no one should interpret this as we're ending quantitative tightening. all we're doing is slowing the runoff so that we can begin to monitor Market signals for when we are eventually going to get at that ample Reserve regime. there's a lot of ambiguity about that. demand for reserves uh continues to change, continues to grow. the events uh in the banking sector- Silicon Valley Bank and some other bank failures- uh has also heightened. uh focus on liquidity for banks. so we're not exactly sure when we're going to go from the super abundant regime of reserves to an ample regime and we're going to. I think we're going to really focus on Market Market signals where federal funds rate is pricing and other short-term Market signals to give us that indication of when we're getting close. and we just want to slow things down a little bit so we have time to Mo to monitor those Market signals. but it's not going to end up changing the destination. very good, thank you, and and to you, president gnot. um, so so far all is going smoothly on European Bond markets and raining liquidity so far has not had any created any issues. but from the fed's perspective, as president kashkar just mentioned, uh, we learned that it can go smoothly until it doesn't. um, how do you think about the unwinding of this balance sheet process in in Europe? well, I mean for us, uh, it's been very clear that we had identified raate policy as our Primacy, our primary instrument to Titan policy. that was simply the instrument we knew best. uh, uh. we have never done uh QT uh before and in the European context, I think there is an additional layer of complication with balance sheet policy. that is has to do with the fact that we don't have centralized federal debt that we accumulate on our balance sheet, but it is national debt and there is always the spread issue and uh and sort of that. Bond markets in the Euro area can get to be quite sensitive to these uh kinds of decisions. so we have opted for a slow, gradual but predictable approach: running of uh the AP and, from uh the summer onward, running off 50% of the pep and then from January onward also full runoff uh of the pep, simply through a discontinuation of uh of investment. to sort of guide that process, we have announced that we would uh tighten the gap between the mro rate and the dfr rate in terms of our operational uh framework review in order uh to create as little room as possible for undo volatility, let's say volatility. that was not helpful in terms of setting the monetary uh stance and now in the coming years we will simply have to see where that winding down uh will take us and at some point, of course, we will also hit the point where excess liquidity will have been effectively removed. but we will see that in terms of more pressures, more volatility, uh in the, uh in the money market, and that is the period in time in which we have to start thinking about how we want to shavee our structural liquidity provision operations. that's going to be a mix of refinancing operations and bond Holdings. very likely, when that structural operation will become relevant, we will start from a position where we will still have significant Bond Holdings but no refinancing operations anymore. so if we then have to expand, probably we will first opt for refinancing operations until we have the right balance that we want to see in our structural operations- uh between the two. but my anticipation is that for the coming years it will be a gradual process of winding down uh, our balance sheet, and then we will have to empirically find out where the optimal level of uh, of reserves in uh, will be. Professor ring, you helped build up the long-term operations at the ECB right pre pre Global Financial when you were at dcv. you were also doing uh- not long-term operations- um- during the global financial crisis. I think you were there at that point, uh, any comment or anything that you might have on this process of balance sheet reduction. well, one is that the ACB had, uh, an experience with QT, okay, when the ELO were repaid during the big, big periods of the leverage. that that wasn't very nice. um, well, I mean, I think, the ample Reser- I'm a fan of the ample Reserve System. I think it's quite, you know, it's robust. it has a lot of uh, uh, a lot of advantages in terms of control of interest rate, in terms of having two instruments, one for liquidity and one for interest rate. uh, I understand that it is more difficult to apply it in the Euro area because of the lack of a unitary treasury market, but if we abstract for that problem, which is, uh, you know it's, it's a problem which I would say political economy problem more than an economic problem, I think that definitely, uh, you know, to go for ample Reserve, uh, it's, in my view- I mean, I don't have much experience in operations, but in my view- that that would be much more robust than risking to get close to the Kink of that curve for the demand of reserves where actually, you know, the volatility of rates could, uh, could get into, into the let's. let's go back to rates. okay, so in markets, one of the key issue is: to what extent can the monetary policy of the fed and the ECB diverge? normally, the fed is really seen as the stackelberg leader right in setting interest rate and and dcbs follow the as the follower. uh, president, not. do you think that there could be any constraint, and up to which point can the ECB embark on a cutting cycle on its own? let's say, um, Can the ECB cut three or four times policy races? you were mentioned in in your chart, the prediction from from the chart you showed, uh, If the Fed were, at most perhaps uh cut policy rate once this year, but also that we have to find out. I mean, we both have a domestic mandate, uh, that is, that we have to focus on our own uh inflation Outlook. but clearly, monary policy always takes place in a global context because there are Global spillovers. um, at the same time, it's not so clear in what direction these spillovers would take you in the current context, because it may well be true that if we cut more aggressively than the Fed, that that would lead, that might lead to a lower exchange rate on our end, which would then be inflationary. at the same time, uh, less rate cuts on the FED side also means an overall uh tightening of financial conditions, of bond market conditions, which tend to have a strong Global component, with global spill overs which will also spill over to the euro area. so if the FED uh Cuts less than expected, then we will get two opposing effects and we will simply have to observe which of the two effects actually is dominating in terms of our inflation Outlook and that will have to decide what uh what room for maneuver we will have in uh in cutting interest rat. but it's not necessarily clear that movements on the US side move in one direction for us or in the other direction, given that it is multiple channels and they don't all work in the same direction, and president kashkar does. normally we never think about how the FED can internalize policies from other central banks, right? we see it, as I said, as the leader, how do you think about it? is there any consideration from your side uh of uh internalizing? or which impact could the ECB policy stance have on on the US? I thought president not said it very well. I mean, we pay attention to the rest of the world, because the rest of the world matters to the US, even though our mandate is a domestic mandate. and so, you, we run models and we look at what's happening all around the world and we factor that in. but ultimately we are accountable to our government, just as the ECB is accountable to the European citizens. uh, you know these deviations, they happen and eventually the advanced economies tend to move kind of together over time, but they're deviations in the short run. so personally I don't think it's a huge deal. uh, I think we're all going to do what we need to do. Mark, can we do it? will it happen? I mean, you and I and our teams were uh published a piece uh not so long ago, I guess in April. looking at the size of these uh discrepancies- and exactly to your point, I mean, these discrepancies have happened before. um, even if we went along the projected path, uh, for rates both in the US and in Europe, the Gap would not be unusually large, not not much larger than what we. I mean actually not smaller than what we've seen in many instances since the early 2000s um, including just before the pandemic as well. so nothing really dramatic there. it might lead to some adjustment to the exchange rate, but, um, I think maybe the last question on this Divergence, because it was brought up at the very beginning, right, it was a long-term Divergence in terms of productivity growth and, uh, uh, and I think the the interesting, uh, obviously, the productivity growth has been much stronger in the US than in the Euro area since the global financial crisis. I don't know, perhaps to you, president kasari, do you? What are the factor that you think are worth, you know, underlining, and what could Europe learn, maybe, from the US in terms of enhancing its productivity? uh, boy, that's a an impossible question to answer. um, why is US productivity growth right now as high as it is? it's higher than it was before the pandemic is that it's just a residual of a bunch of other measurements. so, you know, could it revert back to normal levels? uh, I'm at this point. I think it's much too early to say AI is showing up in the economy. the history of productivity developments and new technologies would say it's going to take a long time. if it shows up in the official, official statistics, uh, it'll probably take a long time before that. uh, so I- I don't know, I mean economists- point to flexibility in the US Labor Market. uh, as one possible uh Source. we know that there's been a lot of new business formation in the US, beginning in the pandemic, but it's been sustained remarkably well. uh, that could be another source, just basic business dynamism. uh, you know what drives that, what drives those Animal Spirits? you know, I don't, you know, I don't have any good, good suggestions. it's a tough one. and Professor rling, you in the past many times, wrote report also for the CPR, with the CPR colleagues, to shape up European institutions. we have European election this year. anything that we could expect from again we are both Italians, the Two Italians see report, the letter report, the dragy report- can we uh expect that anything after the European election will be put on the table to enhance productivity in the Euro area? well, Europe, if it wants survive, has to get their act, its act together. I think in many. you know a lot of challenges, so we cannot continue to be prisoner of our fragmentation in many ways, and president, not thecb is not shy giving advices to governments, whether it's on fiscal policy, on structural policy. what would be your advice or hope for after the European election? well, I'd prefer to say a few things from a more analytical uh perspective on productivity. I mean productivity has been negative in the Euro area- in the first quarter it was Zero, which is no longer negative, at least. um, probably there's a cyclical element to it, but also a structural element and the cyclical element might go away if we get more recovery. and maybe if we had had the fiscal policy of the US, uh, with well, much larger deficits, much more stimulus, the cyclical element in the Europe would have in Europe would also have been smaller. but the second point that I've been making in this context, then, when you think about the impact that fiscal policy has had on productivity growth, it's not only the size of the fiscal stimulus. I also think that the design of the measures during the pandemic, which in the US were basically, uh, focused at companies laying off workers, providing income support and then in the recovery, have the workers being rehired, whereas in Europe the support was paying the firms to keep the employers at the payroll, even if they were not productive at that moment. so what you're saying in terms of new startups, in terms of Labor reallocation, which is massively taking place in the US, we have Frozen in Europe the supply side of our economy, uh, because of the design features of the support that we game, and I think it's an interesting research question whether that differential nature of fiscal support is also one of the factors, the lack of dynamism we have had on the suppli side, first the freezing because of the uh, the pandemic support, then the labor hoarding, uh, during the, let's say, the, the, the quarters in which we had stagnation, Etc. whether also that lack of dynamism is a factor? uh, and that is for us, I think, very difficult ult to mimic, because the, yeah, the character of a labor market is fundamentally different. if we were to do a US type experiment in Europe with massive layoffs and then rehiring, elderly workers would probably not be rehired in Europe because we don't have a tradition that elderly workers will be rehired. in the US you hire elderly workers as easily as younger workers. so I think it's that structural difference in the labor market that for me is also an important part of the puzzle. but there are no easy answers for it. but can I add one quick thing, which is: um, I agree with everything you said, but I remember the policy deliberations when the pandemic first hit and there was a lot of admiration for the European system of keeping workers attached to their firms and a lot of hand ringing in the US that our system is so barbaric- I mean, that's a harsh word- but our, our system is so backwards relative to the enlightened European system. you know, fast forward four years and now you're saying: well, maybe it wasn't as enlightened as it appeared four years ago. I'm not here to judge one way or the other, but it's just interesting how perspectives can change over time about the same very basic programs. I agree, I was thinking exactly the same, but I see we are already running out of time. before giving space to our audience with the Q&A, I just want to ask you what I call a classic one. so it seems to me that, broadly speaking, we are painting quite a good scenario. we, you know a gold, Le gold like gold, goldilux kind of like scenario where you know growth remains solid or will improve in the Euro area, inflation is going down to Target, whether faster or slower, but, um, sort of speaking, a very positive outlook. uh, I always think what could we be missing, right? what keeps you at night? obviously it's a metaphoric question. I really hope you all sleep very well at night, but very quickly, maybe, starting from you, president, not geop risks, I think, by far, and not just because of their monetary policy impact, by the way, but also because, uh, I mean, the hoodies will still be there 18 to 24 months from now. so, uh, the current running up in shipping cost, we really have to monitor whether whether that is truly a temporary uh effect or uh or not. um, we have a war uh in Europe which is uh, well, no, nowhere near uh the end. there are more autocrats that have sort of geopolitical Ambitions, um, and all these, Europe will always be in the epicenter of The Economic Consequences of this, uh, these geopolitical tens, tensions, since we are so much dependent on International uh international trade and the open uh rules-based system, uh, that we try to build after World War II. Professor Rik, yeah, I would agree, and, as a European, what I'm worrying about is that, uh, you know, our system is not fit for purpose because of the fragmentation of fiscal policy, the political fragmentation. so that means a lot of responsibility for the only Federal Institution that we have, which is, uh, the ACB. so I think that, uh, we have survived the crisis of 2010, 2011, uh, big geopolitical crisis like this in the making. maybe it will be a harsher test, profess president kascar. so, in addition to geopolitics. one um, one factor that we haven't talked about yet, uh, which I don't think is a financial stability risk, but it's nonetheless a risk, uh, to the US economy and presumably to the European economy, is commercial real estate. uh, we expect there to be big losses of in the commercial real estate sector. we think- we've studied it very carefully- that the most banks seem like they are well positioned to handle those losses, but my experience in the financial crisis of' 08 is usually there are surprise es on where those losses end up, which balance sheets, ultimately, are exposed to those losses, and when those surprises manifest, reveal themselves, uh, that's something else that I'm concerned about. so we're looking, we're monitoring very carefully, but I also know that we're going to be surprised where some of those losses end up. Mark, I think we have a long list of like things to worry about here, and I worry about all these two. I think I would just add to that maybe, um, the prospect again of ending the year with an inflation that's slightly higher than what we anticipate and hope for and then starting 2025 with a renewed set of inflationary pressures, uh, in the US in particular. uh, things like uh tariffs, for instance. uh, we haven't really had time to talk about it just yet, but the um also. we benefited a lot from immigration, a big surge in Immigration and get, and next year we are likely to see some some curtailing of that immigration which might put some uh additional pressures as well on the labor Market again. so some renewed inflationary pressures. that's going to make the whole work of bringing inflation back down a little harder, thank you, and perhaps with that, with the high for longer, then Financial stability concern could become more relevant. but let's become. let's go now to to our audience and and Q&A. uh, I think the way we would do it is that we collect two, three questions together. so please introduce yourself and then um, to whom uh mics are around the room. so please, one question here from this side. maybe we collect. yeah to, okay, thank you, um. Chris Crow from capula. thanks very much for this wonderful panel. I just had a question on um stickiness in price, in inflation, particularly in services, that we've seen on both sides of the Atlantic. I was wondering if, um the panel can give an indication of where they see that coming from. is it labor market or is it coming from from somewhere else, and if there are any sort of differences that we should look for between the US and Euro area experience SC. thank you. one more question I think back. I have, sorry, the light in my great here very Char shaku from T Capital. my question is to president. not I wanted to ask where do you land in the discussion of neutral rate in Europe? most of your colleagues mentioned that neutral rate in Europe is close to 2%, maybe slightly above. is seems to argue that it can be materially higher than that. I wanted to know where do you think that might be in Europe or where do you land in that discussion? great, shall we start with the answering to these two questions first. you want to start pres. not. I think I did Show a slide based on the deviation of real rates from uh rstar according to one of the models uh that we use for uh, for uh calculating rstar. but I think I also try to con uh convey the message that of course the confidence bound around these estimates are quite wide. so if you say, is our star now slightly above zero and hence iar, let's say 2.25 or 2.5, your guess is as good as mine. it's within the range of possible outcomes, I would say, but obviously I would not pin myself down on that being the outcome. I do think that the future rate path is a path of rate cuts and we will gradually learn along the path how inflation will respond and what is the rate that in the world absence of shocks- which will definitely not be the world we will be in, but anyway we'll keep inflation roughly uh anchored at, uh, at, at, at 2%. on the Persistence of services inflation, I do think that this is to large extent wage driven. services are very, very much wage labor in uh labor intensive. and the distance between, let's say, uh, the current uh wage contracts that we are seeing, combined with absent or even negative productivity growth, which uh means a double Wy on human labor cost, combined with the fact that at some point unit profit margins will have less and less and less space to absorb these higher unit labor cost, that makes it for us to carefully monitor whether the decline in this triangulation of wages, productivity and unit profits, whether that that pattern is truly compatible with a 2% inflation Target. because if productivity growth in the Euro area would not recover any farther than, let's say, half a percent or so, well then the sustain wage increase in the Euro area is 2 plus a half, is 2 and a half%, and the current 4.7, for instance, that we registered for q1 is still quite a bit uh, quite a distant away from the 2 and a half. so we still have a trajectory uh to uh to go through um, and that should then also take out gradually. the persistence in Services inflation. president kascar, anything on the persistent? he said it very well, okay. so so few couple of more question. we have two people from this part of the room. please, I, yeah, go Str El Cap. maybe if you you can stand up, we can see you and hear you. thank you, thank you very much for the conference. marus sing in capital. let's say that productivity bounds in the EUR area- sorry, a question for pres, not productivity rebound. you un cost growth decreases, but the employment rates, rather than moving slightly up as you expect, start moving down. you still go for three cats this year because you are far from our start, or do you stop and wait to see what happens? thank you well, first of all, there was an uh implication in your questions that I tried to carefully avoid not formulating uh in this, uh in in this manner. um, I mean productivity growth, will enter into the equation because it will allow uh higher wages to be absorbed without erosion of profit margins. that's the whole triangulation that I will continue uh to look at and that will decide, in my view, our room uh to cut rates and whether at the end of the year it will be X or X+ one or xus one uh number of rate cuts. on that I don't want to comment at this uh at this point in time. thank you, there was another. please do you have mik here? uh hi, thank you very much for the presentations, Mike bigs from gab. I've just got a question for president Kashkari. you know you saying that there was pressure from monetary policy on the US economy and that appears to be fade, appears to have faded. you don't feel as if there's any pent up pressure anymore. so this would be consistent, I think, with interest rates going up, being restricted to the economy, but once they level off, them not being so restrictive to the economy, uh, or the alternative is we just happen to have absolutely hit our still otherwise fine. so, uh, when you think about, you think, the level of interest rates, the level on its own matters, what do you see is a transmission mechanism from there? and if you were trying to differentiate between level doesn't matter and level matters, it's just because we're are at R star, our. would you try and differentiate? thank you very much. so I would say I think level matters. um, I don't think it's simply the change in interest rates that matters. how would I explain what we've seen? I would argue that most of the disinflation that we enjoyed last year came from the supply side of the economy, normalizing rather than monetary policy constraining demand. and so if most of the disinflation supply side normalize and let's just say say ballpark, it brought us down to a 3% inflation level run rate, it's maybe a little more than that, but let's say 3, three and a half and mo by most measures that I've seen in the US, Supply chains have healed. so we're probably not going to get a big boost, disinflationary Boost, from the supply side going forward. now the question is: is monetary policy tight enough to take us the rest of the way, from three or three and a half all the way back down to our 2% inflation Target? and that's where I'm unclear. we are seeing some evidence that there's weakness in the US economy, so there's an uptick in delinquencies for credit card borrowers and Auto Loan borrowers for low FICO score borrowers. that's an indication of that. there's some evidence that the wage growth is moderating from its very high levels- not low enough, uh, just as president not said here in the Euro zone, so it does appear that monetary policy is having some effect on the economy. is that enough to bring us back down in a reasonable period of time? that's where I'm unsure and that's where I think just sitting here until we get more clarity on that, uh, makes sense to me. but I'm not in, I'm not of the camp of saying that the only tightening is if you raise, if you make a change. I do think levels matter. more questions here on the first, the first row, and so perhaps if you raise your hands, also the people for keep your and race until you get the mic with the help. thanks, hi, Christi, from Al for president kashari: um, do you need to see grow slow below potential and the unemployment? can you speak closer? do do you need to see growth slow below potential and the unemployment rate go up before you're convinced that you've defeated the last um mile on inflation? no, I don't think so. I mean if, if again, if we saw the trend of the second half of last year continue. we had strong GDP growth. we had, uh, a very strong labor market. that was sustained. I would love to see that continue, but then continue to see the disinflationary process work its way back down towards our 2% Target. I don't think we have to see a weakness on the real side of the economy now. we might end up seeing weakness on the real side of the economy uh, coincident with that declining, that decline of inflation. so I'm not saying we have to have a weakening on the real side of the economy necessarily. thank you, I think there was two question in the middle from this side. I'm sorry, I don't see much on this side. so please, pleas, raise your hand. much hi, thank you very much for your thoughts. D J Morgan. um, I just had a question for president N. I guess you mentioned in the very beginning of your speech that the monetary policy did help with the supply side shock and the supply side component of the inflation, mainly, I understand, through the mechanism of anchoring the inflation expectations, uh. but then the professoring also alluded to the fact that perhaps we are crowding out, uh the investment that could help um increase the supply or, if you want, to move the uh Supply um supply curve to the right um. how do you think- like I don't, I'm, I guess, wondering if there is a framework um that you think about when thinking about the like balancing out of the you know potential benefit of decreasing rates in order to help the supply side move um further out. and then, um, kind of as a side thought, what do you think about the theories about the um? higher interest rates could be actually inflationary depending on you know how much um interest rate bring the um, I guess, additional income to uh asset owners, Etc. maybe we can collect another couple of questions and then thank youfo. thanks for for your comment. I have a question for President kashari. we know that, sorry. we know that the preferred inflation measure for the FED is a PC index that is expected to continue to decline some some swings the next few months. but the Gap with the CPI is wi is also interesting. paper written by Mark is a team this morning explaining the. the white Gap is expected to decline very moderately. so I want to ask you if the Fed consider not only the evolution of PC but also the Gap versus CPI and, if so, how much of this could affect fed decision in the next few months if the Gap remain wide. thank you, thank you. would you like to start? yeah, um, I mean um, what can I say? um, basically, we set interest rate for uh to Anchor inflation at our 2% Target. so in that sense we have a primary mandate. but, as Professor R also pointed out, we also do have secondary mandate. so in a way we're now playing uh defense. as long as we can make sure that we have a credible uh perspective to hitting our 2% inflation Target, let's say in mid 2025, there is room for us to cut rates and of course, that cutting of interest rates will be investment positive H it will gradually ease the financing conditions and some of that easing is already priced in at this moment. if you look at the longer term borrowing cost, I entirely agree with uh Neil, that sort of the the. the really relevant borrowing costs for the economy and for investment are, of course, the longer term interest rates, and the longer term interest rates already take into account a certain number of rate Cuts, uh that are uh being uh being priced in. so that's the framework with within which I think we look at the economy to the extent that it is possible that we can continue to deliver 2% with slightly lower interest rates. of course, we will then cut interest rates, if only because we also don't want to undershoot the inflation Target. we have a symmetric 2% inflation Target. I think that is also important, uh, to to underline here. we didn't have that for a long time, but this was a decision that we took at our strategy review in July 2021 and I think so far, it has served us quite well, this Sim 2% inflation Target. now your second question on whether higher rates are inflationary. and then the corollary of that would be the lower rates would bring inflation down. then turkey should be the Paragon of Central Banking at this moment in time. right, because that's where, for a while, they tried to bring inflation back, uh, with keeping interest rates very low, and that didn't happen. and I guess it not only did it not happen there. I think there is a wealth of empirical evidence that actually, if you want to bring inflation down, that higher interest rates is the mechanism to do so and not lower interest rates. uh, if it was true, that would be too good to be true, but unfortunately, things that are too good to be true are often too good to be truear. maybe on the Gap, yeah, on on. so PC: there many different measures of inflation. PC is our official chosen Target, actually headline PC. we look at core inflation as a pretty good indicator of where we think headline inflation is going, because food and energy tend to be so volatile. but we also look, we break it down and we look at the various major components underlying PC. we also look at CPI. all of this is trying to inform us of where do we think underlying pce inflation is headed. so pce is our official Target. we're going to deliver pce, but we look at all of these different measures to give us insight into where is that inflation headed. so one of the fundamental um breakdowns that we look at: we of course look at food and energy. we look at Goods inflation, we look at Services inflation, we look at, uh, housing inflation and we break those apart to try to understand where the components are going. but ultimately the policy makers need to have confidence that underlying inflation is going back to our 2% Target and that's what. that's what people will be looking for to get that confidence. thank you, any great please. thank you, Bill Nelson. Bank policy Institute. I have a question for president cashar. is the committee still contemplating the possibility of eventual sales of uh mortgage back Securities to hasten the move towards mostly a treasury market uh treasury portfolio? and secondly, uh, do you support putting significant restrictions on banks abilities to book their investment account Securities as held aured? uh? on the second question, I'm not sure. I don't have a u? um I'm not prepared to make a comment on that. on the first question, we know that the uh mortgage back security part of our balance sheet is going to take a lot longer to run off. the treasuries run off very mathematically. the mortgage back Securities it's going to depend on how long people- because people refinance a very low rates- they're unlikely to refinance those, so those are going to stick around for a long period of time. there's been some discussion that if we wanted to move to a treasury only portfolio, that at some point uh we could consider actual asset sales, not just allowing them to run off. personally, I don't have a strong view one way or the other. I don't think personally, getting to an all treasury portfolio uh is of supreme importance that we do it very quickly uh. I see some benefits of getting there eventually uh, but needing to introduce new types of uh trading techniques for us that we haven't done at the FED before uh, at least not in a long time, uh, and anyway I would need to be convinced that it would be worth it. I don't think having having some marginal portion of mortgage back security on the balance sheet, I don't think that's particularly costly for the Fed, so I don't really see what the advantage would be. thank you, more questions over here in the yes sure, Char sh again from T president kashar, you've been very open about your uh thought in the scps in various speeches and interviews. given that you mentioned that you can see policy rate just being, you know, unchanged indefinitely, does that mean you currently thinking about no change or you know no cuts? um, is there one for this year? well, I put in my March SCP. I had two uh Cuts in my March SCP and the data since then has not given me more confidence that the disinflationary process is underway. so you know, I want to get all the data I can get before the next fomc meeting before I reach any conclusions. uh, but I can tell you this: it certainly won't be more than two cuts uh which are penil in in March. please hi, Desmond Lawrence from State Street Global advisers. um, right across the panel. thank you for a great presentation. um, I'm curious, do do, is there a little bit too much forward guidance? does it end up having people in a tricky spot? I'm taking a very selective example. so if I look at how bonds responded in the summer of last year and then going into the winter, we had an aggressive sell off and then an aggressive rally. um, may not matter to some investors, May to others do. do central banks try to too hard to give forward guidance? is there a downside to it? yeah, please, and then sure, I mean, certainly there's a look. we want to be transparent about what we're looking at. these are the data we're focused on, these are our objectives and I think, uh, markets have seen the data as we've seen it, as the data has come in. markets have adjusted their expectations, at least for the fed's rate path, based on the data that has come in. certainly, if we give for strong forward guidance and that forward guidance tends to be wrong- wrong that can introduce volatility to markets- but forward guidance is a very powerful tool, just as uh president not said. you know, at the FED we raised, uh we tightened, monetary policy through our forward guidance before we raised the policy rate and that had a very rapid repricing, for example, of mortgage rates in the US, just as it had in Europe. so it's a powerful Tool, uh, but I agree with you. I mean, we need to use it selectively and we need to make definitive statements when we have a lot of confidence. right now, what you're hearing, at least for most of my colleagues around the fomc- is a lack of confidence. we're all saying we're not sure what's happening to underlying inflation, so we're going to sit here until we get confidence one way or the other of what's happening in the economy and then we will move, and so, uh, I don't think we're actually giving a lot of forward guidance right now. I do think we're being very transparent about what we're looking at and what questions we still have. yeah, I, I again, we agree. forward guidance is clearly a two-edge sword, uh. I mean, we introduced it in 2013, uh, when interest rate hit or were close to the lower bound, uh, and and then it looked like a too good to be true instrument because, thanks to forward guidance also, long rates came down and it almost seems like a costly, a Costless, uh- form of additional easing that we got at the lower bound. but I think in the 2122 episode we also saw the shadow side of forward guidance, where, when, all of a sudden, we had two major shocks- inflationary shocks- and we had to turn the ship, that at that point in time we could not turn the ship any faster than we could because, uh, we had given forward guidance on rates, on QE, on sequencing and stuff, and that if, from one day or the other, we would change that guidance, that would probably create some turbulence in the markets, and financial stability is always, I think, a precondition for monetary policy decisions to work their way through the transmission process in the deling, the monetary stance that you want to deliver. so it's a two-edge short. I I still see it as an instrument that might be useful again if ever we arrive in an effective lower bound environment again. but outside the lower bound, I would be very, very careful, uh, with the instrument, because you create expectations and to subsequently then have to change the expectations is not always cost free. thank you, yes, please, president, not uh, Ro from Bay. I'm here. where are you at back? I see the back, oh, yeah, okay, uh, my question to you is that a lot of um central banks have moved, are now speaking about greater confidence in forecasts, as forecast errors have been going down, yeah, whereas in the last year or so there was more focus on spot inflation. now, when I look at your December eurosystem staff projections, more than half of the countries have 2026 inflation below 2%. the dut Central Bank has it at 1.9. so if there is greater confidence on your forecasts, how is the governing Council balancing the risk of undershooting projections when so many national central banks are telling you that you're actually missing- missing your inflation mandate over 2026, with some projections as low as 1.4%? thank you. well, first of all, we there is only one monetary policy and the only inflation Outlook at which we calibrate the monetary policy is the Euro area average one. so even if 19 out of 20 would be below and one country would be above Target and the average would be 2%, then the relevant factor for us would be the 2% average. so the number of national central banks that, in and of itself, would have an inflation rate either below or above 2% is not per se Factor, uh, or is not per se, is not a factor that can play a role. we have one monetary policy, only one instrument to do, and it is Euro area inflation that we have to, uh have to focus on. so the relevant part from your Exposition was the 1.9%. and then you can, of course, ask yourself the question: is that sufficiently deviating from 2%, given that there are still, even if your projections are much more reliable than they were in the past, that are standard errors? I I mean, these are, let's say, stochastic variables and uh and, and that's a discussion on how precise do you want to hit the 2% Target? but it is a problem that we have country specific heterogeneity. but you know, I assume, that in the US, California and Kentucky are also not always equal, synchronized, in terms of their business cycle and their inflation rates. uh, we have couple of more minutes, so maybe last round of questions. yes, please, hi, uh, I'm, alas, also from State Street Global advisor, so I guess my my question follows on from what Rohan and Dez said, which is: have we entered a period of data dependence or greater data dependence? precisely when data is becoming less reliable, we see bigger revisions, more frequent revisions. feels like seasonal adjustments aren't working in in a cycle which has been distorted by covid, so is is this a problem or is this something you guys talk about and or or or am just kind of amplifying something which has always been the case- is that, for me, I'm happy to start. I mean, you're right, the data is, uh, uncertain and there are big revisions. but the reason to the prior question, the reason we've been Focus, I've been so focused on the actual data, is because our Workhorse models that we rely on did not do a good job forecasting the high inflation on the way up and did not not do a good job forecasting the rapid disinflation on the way down, and so we've had to let the data guide us, as imperfect as the data is, and so we look at a lot of different data sources. we have a lot of conversations with workers, with labor groups, with businesses, large and small, to try to get a read of what's happening on the underlying economy. but that's the, unfortunately, that's like. the inherent to policymaking is you have to make decisions in the face of ambiguity. even if the ambiguity is higher than it normally is, you still need to make decisions. we just reach for as much data as we can to try to make the best decisions that we can. yeah, uh, I mean, I, I entirely agree. I think the data always will have its flaws, but the development over the last few years was that models for a while did not produce outcomes that were very useful for monetary policy. I think models are making their comeback, but we will never only uh Focus ourselves on the models. we will, of course, always have have a sort of a broader set or a broader information set, where also hard and soft data uh will continue to play, uh continue to play a role. what we will try not to do is to give too much forward guidance on too many future meetings out there, but we will still use the projections to decide, yeah to inform the decision that we have to take for the meeting which is the immediately next uh next one. well, I think we we have now now exhausted our time. I cannot thank you more for participating to this panel today and for your excellent comments and remarks, for having flown uh from from more or less distant places and especially for being so generous with your time. but before we go and enjoy the drinks, I also would like to thank uh for a moment the staff that has helped us organize this event. my colleague barley, Mia, Charlotte, cloud and Ben worked for two years on this event. the CPR um the. the president of the CPR, beatric Deo, is not here, but she obviously was very instrumental in making this event possible, and the CEO of CPR, T Den here, Nadin and borbora and, last but obviously not least, the staff of President kasari and president no, Corina and Andrea, who, also here in person, were very kind in dealing with us in being able to set up this event. I hope you all had a very fruitful afternoon and I we all hope to be able to repeat this in the future and hopefully to make this a yearly, if not a b yearly, event. thank you very much, thanks. [Applause].
