https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/fireside-chat-with-neel-kashkari-at-williston-basin-conference

Neel Kashkari participates in fireside chat on the economy at the 2024 Williston Basin Petroleum Conference

May 15, 2024

Williston Basin Petroleum Conference

Neel Kashkari

now our last session this morning is going to be fantastic. we have with us Todd Slawson and Neil kashari. um, we're just getting going here for this morning's session. next up will be our petroleum Council chairman of the board, Todd Slawson. he's going to have a discussion with Neil kashari, president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank. Neil is no stranger to this event. I believe it's the third time. you've been here, Neil. this is awesome. um, he has presented several times. um, and I vividly recall one of those times, Neil, you made the comment that was: the technology developed in the bakan has had a bigger imprint on the world than the iPhone. that's quite a statement and I think we are living up to it. bachan, we're going to see what Neil has to say today. along of with Neil, we have is Todd Slawson. now Neil is the president of the Minneapolis fed, one of the federal reserve's 12 Regional Banks. The Ninth District, which is what we are, is made up of Minnesota, Montana, North and South Dakota, Northwestern Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. nail serves as a member of the Federal Open Market commission, where he sets the Nations monetary policy. now, some of you may know that a few years ago I served on on Neils Board of Directors for the Minneapolis fed and I remember when I was asked to do this, I said: I'm a geologist, I am not a banker. what do you need me on this board for? and the answer was: we have an entire Bank full of Bankers. we need business people. so thank you, Neil. I really appreciate the time I got to serve and help on the on the on the board, and I will tell you part. part of my role was living tyoga, North Dakota. as a geologist in the heart of the bachan. my job was to attend the board meetings about eight times a year and bring the story of the bachan from Watford City and Dickinson, tyoga and Ray and Williston and Min not, and take that story right back to Neil and to the, the board at the Minneapolis fed, and from there Neil took that story directly about our industry to the Federal Open Market commission- how cool is that? that we had a voice directly to Washington DC monetary policy. so thank you, Neil. Neil began his career as an aerospace engineer developing technology for NASA space missions- a literal rocket scientist. he later held a variety of roles in public service and finance, most notably as the assistant Secretary of the Treasury during the 2008 financial crisis, where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program. many, many of us remember tarp. Neil lives with his wife, two young children and New Finland dog in arono, Minnesota. please help me. welcome Todd Slawson and Neil [Applause] kosari. welcome Neil. thank you for coming to bismar. uh to present in front of this conference today. we really appreciate it. um, first of all, did you stay up last night to watch the Denver versus Minnesota game? I wish I did. I did not. I was tired. I went to sleep. thank you for having me, though. yeah, are you a Timberwolves fan? you know, I'm really much more of a football fan than I am a basketball fan. I know my Minnesota friends are going to be outraged at me saying that, but uh, I'm, I'm a football guy. okay, just in case you don't know, Denver one, otherwise I wouldn't have brought it up. so you're an Aeros, aerospace engineer. um, where are you from? where did you grow up? I was born and raised in akan, Ohio. I studied engineering at the University of Illinois, as Cathy said, worked in Aerospace for a few years before I went back to get my MBA and went into business and finance. okay, good, so you're speaking to a group of Engineers, geologist, salesman- there might be some bankers in here. so I kind of want to set the stage a little bit by talking about why there are 12 branches of the Federal Reserve versus one. what are your mandates? what's the fmoc, which is the uh- Federal Open Market Committee? can you kind of set the table a little bit and kind of sure? so those? uh? first of all, let me say thank you for inviting me back. it's great to be here. um, the US Congress created the Federal Reserve, our nation Central Bank, in 1913 and our basic job is to. we do a bunch of different things, but one of our basic jobs is to try to manage the ups and downs of the US economy. if the econom is growing too slowly, we will traditionally cut interest rates to try to give it a boost. if the econom is overheating and inflation is too high, like recent experience, we will raise interest rates, uh to try to tap the breaks on the economy to bring the inflation back down. in 1913, when Congress created the Federal Reserve, they did something unique and they wanted, just as Kathy said, they wanted all the different regions of our country to have a direct voice in that policy-making process. so they created the Board of Governors in Washington DC, uh, and then they created 12 independent federal reserve banks, and our jobs at the Minneapolis fed are to represent all of you, and that's why we have a board of directors made up of Business Leaders from all across our region. Kathy served for six years, uh. we have Brenda Foster- I'm not sure if Brenda is here today- A Banker from North Dakota who's on our board right now, uh, and others over time that contribute their wisdom of what's happening in the regional economy. bring it back to Minnesota and I take it back to Washington DC. so our mandates as it relates to the economy are stable prices, what we Define as 2% inflation- I don't need to tell you that we've had much higher inflation than that that in recent years- and maximum employment, as many Americans gainfully employed and contributing to our economy. well, typically, if you see that if inflation is too high, we'll raise interest rates to try to bring it down, or if inflation is where we want it to be, but the labor market there's a lot of unemployment, we will traditionally cut interest rates to try to bring it back into balance, and so that's you know. walking or traveling around the region is a big part of my job to get to know what's happening here in the economy in this part of our district and then ultimately we have to make the best decisions we can for the country as a whole. we can't set a different interest rate for North Dakota and California and New York. we have to try to pick the monetary policy that's right for America as a whole. but my job is to make sure that this region and my colleagues jobs are to make sure that this region has a direct voice in that process, and so that's why I'm grateful to be here and hear from you today. you mentioned one of your mandates is basically a 2% inflation rate that you're trying to get, and obviously the last four years we've been well over that. um, so what caused this inflation? you know it's a Confluence of events that surprised us. to be honest with you. uh, let me just go through them very quickly. first of all, covid hit. the services economy was shut and there was a lot of stimulus put from the government to try to support small businesses and families who lost their jobs or whose businesses were shut. so when the a lot of money went out into the economy at a time when the services economy was shut. you know what we all did, you and me. we bought a lot of goods. so we said, well, we can't go to restaurants, we're going to buy more Goods than we normally would have, at the same time that those Supply chains for those same goods were gummed up because of covid and because of the pandemic. so you saw skyrocketing inflation on the good side of the economy by more demand for goods than is normal and Supply chains for those goods that was gummed up and those Supply chains took a lot longer to get healed than we appreciated, than we thought was likely going to happen. at the same time, and much closer to home in this conference, uh, Putin invaded Ukraine, sending oil markets to the roof, sending commodity markets to the roof and oil Mark. oil, as you know, is a very important input to the global economy. when oil markets and commodity prices go through the roof, that sends an inflation shock wve all around the world. so that happened at the same time. obviously, oil prices have stabilized relative to Russia invading Ukraine. commodity markets have also stabilized. one piece of good news is that when Hamas attacked Israel, we did not see that same price response, uh, from the oil Market or from other commodity markets. that's good news from the fed's perspective that it keeps the inflation- at least another shock- from hitting the economy. that didn't happen, I think, in part because of the work that you all do to effectively try to put a cap on, uh- some of those High Energy prices. so it was a Confluence of events. some of those things have gotten better. the supply chains have mostly gotten better across most sectors of the economy, so that's good news. we haven't seen further uh increases in commodity prices, as I just said from the Middle East, but there's still some underlying demand in the economy, uh, that we're focused on now to get it. inflation's come way down from where it was. it went from a peak of around 9% to somewhere in the threes now. we're still well above where we need to get to, but we've made a lot of progress over the course of the last year. so you mentioned that basically we're down from where we were to begin with in the second half of 2023. basically, inflation dropped. it was looking good, we're on a good path and things seem to kind of rebalance themselves and basically the last several months we've seen the indications that inflation's kind of back up again, even though we see a lot of mixed signals. I mean, the April jobs report came out and said, okay, maybe it is cooling a little bit. so what indicators are you really looking at? there seems to be so many tea leaves out there to read. what are you looking at? that's important to you. it's a symbol for what inflation's doing. uh, well, as you said, we look at a lot of different data to try to get a read on where the economy is going, and so we pay attention, of course, to oil prices because, as I said, oil feeds into just about everything. across our economy are broader energy markets. uh, we're looking at the actual inflation data, a lot of our economic models. we've got very sophisticated models to try to predict how the economy is going to respond. those models have not done a very good job job, given those unique dynamics that I just described. so we have to pay more attention to what's happening, to actual inflation and to what's happening in the real economy. so that means, you know, are Americans spending? people have been spending a lot more than I would have guessed, given where interest rates are. so consumption in the economy has been higher than I would have guessed. as much Gloom as there appears to be. when people are survey about how they feel about the economy, most people are spending like they feel pretty good about the economy. if you go on airplanes, they're usually full. if you go to restaurants, they're usually full. if you go to hotels, they're usually busy. so people tend to be spending more money. the savings rate has gone down: used to be around 7%, now it's around four or 5%. that seems like a small change, but at the scale of the US economy it's actually a lot more spending than we had before, uh, before covid hit. and then I pay a lot of attention to the housing market. housing is a Big Driver of inflation- a Big Driver, a big thing that people spend a lot on. the housing market has been much more resilient, despite the fact that mortgage rates went from 3 to 7 A2 for a 30-year mortgage. the housing market has been much more resilient than I would have expected, given those big mortgage increases. we think that's for a lot of different reasons. we think that there's a pent up demand for housing. there's been a pent up shortage of housing across our economy for the last decade and people are are still feeling like they just need to go out and and buy or leases are now ticking up again. so housing is probably the area I mean we're focused on a lot, but housing is an area that I'm very focused on right now. talking about housing, um, it just seems like we're in a weird situation that I haven't ever seen before. uh, mortgage rates really dropped low- two, two, some percent, and I maybe I'll ask you why they dropped so low. uh, people got great mortgage rates, but they seem to be locked into their homes. they're they. they will never see those mortgage rates again that low in their lifetime and they're not selling their home. so those homes aren't coming back on the market, even though a lot of those people want to move. interest rates are so high. mortgage, uh interest rates are so high that basically developers can't really go out and start new housing, um projects, apartments and single home stuff like that and and then, basically, um, PE firms are are building, buying houses and and uh and creating single family rental homes, which we haven't really seen in the market. so, um, how do you mainly, how do you solve that, uh, that issue with people who are locked into their homes? is it maybe a good idea that maybe that thing can travel with them a little bit to the next home. I know you can't do that, but how do you solve this housing issue? well, this is not. this is not unique to this time period. you 30-year mortgages have been around in America for a long time. if you look back in the late 70s and early 80s, when the Federal Reserve raised interest rates aggressively to bring inflation down, people also had this lock in effect and there was a big spread between current mortgage rates and the average mortgages families are actually paying. so that's not unique to right now. and this notion that people aren't selling, I agree with you. you're right, but those same people also aren't buying. most people who buy a home are leaving a home, and so it takes Supply out of the market, but it also takes demand out of the market. so I I think that that story gets a little bit over too much attention, because it affects both sides of the equation. long term. we know that monetary policy can bring inflation down. the big question mark in my mind is is: how restrictive is policy right now? I would have told you relative to the prepandemic, having mortgage rates where they are and having the federal funds rate as high as it is mid fives- that that would feel like we'd be putting two feet on the brakes, slowing down the economy. it seems like there's more resilience in the economy than I had expected. so maybe because of some of these Dynamics, these interest rates only really mean we're putting one foot on the break and not two, and so there's a lot of amb. the biggest uncertainty in my mind is how much downward pressure is monetary policy putting on the economy. that's an unknown. we don't know for sure, and that tells me we probably need to sit here for a while longer until we figure out where underlying inflation is headed before we jump to any conclusions. so basically, you're seeing the economy is, is is good right now. basically, things have rebalanced themselves and things are kind of ticking along a little bit. and you know, at the first of the year they were saying, hey, there's going to be six cuts. and then people say, well, maybe there's two to three and maybe there's one to two coming up, maybe there's one after the election, and now it's kind of looking like there might not be any Cuts. I know you can't project that or say that, but um, it seems like it's changed and you've kind of said: we're not. maybe the policy, monetary policy is not restrictive enough. maybe it needs to stay here for a while, which is your wait and see approach. or some people said, well, maybe it needs to come up a little bit more, um to knock it back down again and so, um, that's, that's kind of what you've been saying is a. is that path forward? so let's talk about? um the current situation with banks. um, right now they're in. they're in a tough situation as well. people have pulled their deposits out and put them in treasury bills and other other institutions where they get a higher in uh interest rate, the? um they're not getting any loans made, um, because, like I said, the development and it's just rates are too high. um, they're in a kind of an unprofitable situation. um, how do you see help for those Banks? well, I think you, when I talk to a lot of banks- and I'm going to be seeing some this afternoon- they're a little bit more optimistic than I think you just described. you know, traditionally a higher interest rate environment, Banks uh or make more money because they can lend money at a relatively higher rate and while their deposit costs have gone up, consumers tend to be slow to actually move out to money market funds, and so Banks generally are quite slow in raising their deposit cost and so it ends up being a more profitable environment for them. you know, just backstage- this is an anecdote- just backstage, nice woman was helping us. she said: in her day job she's a mortgage banker. and I said to her- and I'm not going to out her, I'm not going to say her name, uh. I said: well, how's business? she said: oh, we're so busy right now. I said: how can you be so busy right now? she said: well, we're making a lot of FHA loans and VA loans and I said: what are the interest rates that people are paying on those FHA and VA loans? she said 6 and2, 6 and 3/4, so less than the 7even and a half in a traditional conventional 30-year mortgage. but I'm surprised that they're so busy, even with their customers paying 6 and a half and 6 and 3/4. that also tells me there's a lot of pent up demand for housing. and so I- I actually the banks that IAL- to feel like, yeah, they don't like that. their deposit costs are going up, but they don't seem like they're that shortage of short of activity, of projects to lend to, whether it's may not be offices for commercial real estate, but there are a lot of other segments in commercial real estate where people seem to be turning to Banks and there's still economic activity. yeah, that's. that's just interesting. during my lifetime, you know, 5 to 6% interest rate or mortgage rate has been pretty normal. I mean, when I got my first home, it was like 11 and 12%, um and so, which was terrible, but two was was two to three was really pretty crazy. how did it get that low? what made it that low? well, I think it was a combination of factors. remember, when Co hit, tremendous uncertainty about what the economic future held. I mean in the moments. go back in time. uh, some unique things happened. when the pandemic hit back in 2008, when we had the financial crisis, investors fled. they wanted to get out of the mortgage Market, they wanted to get out of stocks in many cases, and they ran to US Treasury bonds as a source of safety. so there was a global demand for US Treasury bonds because people said we're going to be safe in treasuries. the darnest thing happened that we've never seen before. in March of 2020, there was so much fear in the world about this pandemic that no one knew how contagious it was. no one knew how deadly it was what was going to happen? were you be able to go to grocery stores and get food? uh, people just wanted cash. they didn't even want treasury bonds, they just wanted Cold, Hard Cash. so there was huge demand across the banks and across the Federal Reserve to flood the economy with cash to meet those needs for cash, and so treasury mark markets ended up freezing up and the Federal Reserve had to step in to try to provide liquidity to calm calm things down. so we had a lot of different emergency uh interventions to try to stabilize financial markets at that time and there was a lot of stimulus coming from the government. those combined actions helped to drive interest rates across these Securities down, including mortgage rates, which ended up then translating into a very attractive mortgage rate for families who wanted to go out and either refinance or get a new loan to buy at home. a lot of investment decisions are made upon the 10-year interest rate, as you've I've heard you say, and right now, uh, we're kind of in an inverse situation. the one year, six-month onee deal is well higher than the 10-year deal. people have suggested that basically, that's uh, maybe because your, the uh fed, is holding too many Securities, treasury, uh bills and and needs to unwind some of those. can you kind of explain what I'm hearing some people say about that? this is a this is a complicated topic, so just bear with me for a moment. uh, you're talking about the yield curve, which is when the US Treasury Department raises money to fund the government so they can raise money from taxes, and they can raise money by issuing debt. they issue debt of different maturities: some of it's one Monon debt, some of it's one-year debt, all the way out to 30-year debt. and if you put those interest rates that the government pays on a piece of paper, you can have a chart and that chart is called the yeld curve and in normal economic environments, when the government borrows for five years, the fiveyear interest rate will be higher than the one-year interest rate, because they're locking up your money for five years instead of one year, or 10 years will be higher than 5 years, or 30 years will be higher yet. so it's an upward sloping curve. well, when central banks raise interest rates aggressively to try to tap the breakes on the economy, a curious thing happens: that overnight interest rates can be higher than long-term interest rates. so we say the yield curve is inverted and it's currently inverted, and it's been inverted for the past couple years as as we've been on this interest rate tightening cycle. now this gets a lot of attention because in the last 30 or 40 years, traditionally when the yield curve is inverted a recession has soon followed. that is, knock on wood, not yet happened. this time the economy has been remarkably resilient. that's been good news, but it leads me to wonder again back to what I said about 10 minutes ago: how much downward pressure is monetary policy really putting on the economy right now? maybe the economy just has a lot more resilience in there. and then it gets more complicated when you think about the Federal Reserves balance sheet. during the pandemic we bought long-term bonds to try to stabilize the treasury market and to drive down long-term interest rates to provide more stimulus. we've been unwinding that process for the past year and that unwinding process is going well. so there's a lot going on into what ends up showing up as long-term interest rates, but I think the process is continuing and will continue for the foreseeable future. the feds, fed's control of monetary po policy and and the legislation's control of uh, fiscal policy, which is basically government spending and Taxation. can you get to your 2% inflation mandate without help from the other side, the fiscal side? we definitely can. uh, you know, if, just generically, if a government spends a lot of money, issues a lot of debt, then you're going to see a more robust economy. and the independent Central Bank- if they have an independent Central Bank the way we we do- the independent Central Bank, all else being equal, will have to have higher interest rates to achieve their inflation goal. so, yes, we can achieve our 2% inflation goal and we're committed to doing so. if the federal government had a different fiscal path, then maybe we would need lower interest rates in order to achieve it, but we can definitely achieve our 2% inflation goal. it might just take a higher rate environment, at least for the near term, to achieve it. well, we're at an oil and gas conference, so we'll get into the oil side of this. um, first of all, you monitor the bachan, uh, the production and everything here, and you know the early story that I'd heard is that basically, royalty owners and people were going into the banks and sending so much money into the banks and and no one was getting loans because everybody had cash and buying new tractors, that basically that money was going up to the feds and then it's like, wait a minute, where's all this money coming from? what's going on over in North Dakota? and that was maybe affecting the M1. but in general, how does the bachan and and the oil production here come into play for your policy, your, your branch Bank, what, how? how are we affecting you and how are you affecting us? a lot of different ways. I mean, first of all, go back. I've been in my job now for this is my ninth year, so there've been in even nine years of the bach in. there have been ups and downs in that nine-year period. look at the labor market here. I think the labor market here. there have been times when the labor market here is incredibly tight and it's not been so tight around the US economy and you're drawing in workers from All Over America to come here, uh, creating opportunity, High wages and also challenges here in the local economy that I met. I met with lots of local leaders that talked about those and then when, of course, when the oil Market goes down, you've got the reverse happening. so our, our region, overall benefits that we have a very diverse economy. if there's a sector of our economy that's down. there are probably other sectors that are doing well. one of the challenges more recently is the whole US economy, the whole labor market. maret has been tight, so if you have a particularly hot sector you can't simply draw workers from the rest of the country, because everyone around the rest of the country also has tight labor markets, and so the dynamic in understanding the labor market the bachan is actually in in North Dakota is very interesting in giving me insight into what's happening here and what it means for the broader economy and then, of course, the oil Market broadly. as I've said, it's such an important input into the US economy and the fact- you know Kathy talked about the Innovation that I've seen- that you all have been leading- that's taken place here in many ways has helped to cap some of the upward price swings of the price of oil, and that's when I say that's profoundly beneficial to the global economy, to help D, you know, help- cut off some of these massive upward price wings that we would otherwise see, and that has has led to profound benefits for the, for the US economy and for the world economy. we'd be happy to give give up the upper ones if we could just get rid of the lower ones. yeah, I understand, I get it. it's uh, trust me. Kathy was on my board when we saw some of the shockingly low oil prices, uh, when the pandemic hit. so I, I get it. well, we didn't think it could go negative until that morning and it's like, oh my gosh, negative 37. so it was. it was not hard to hard to get your head around that. yeah, yeah, but this crowd has been very Innovative. I mean, when things get low prices, we figure out how to drill Three Mile laterals and do different fracking. it's amazing what we've been able to do here over the last 12 years, especially 14 years, especially. so, uh, keep the production up, so, um, okay, so, moving on to some of the other things that you do, you started a opportunity and inclusion growth Institute. can you talk about that a little bit? sure, one of you know our job at the Minneapolis fed is to represent everybody in this region and we have a research center at the Minneapolis fed focusing on tribal economies. tribal economies have a unique set of challenges that are very different than many of the challenges we've been talking about. so we have researchers focusing on that and working with tribe to understand that, and then we have lots of pockets of. while different sectors of the economy may do well, different workers and businesses may do well, we still have people who are not fully participating in our economy, and what are the barriers to them fully participating? what are the barriers to them getting jobs and contributing to our economy and being able to provide for themselves and their family? so we have a research center that we set up six or seven years ago focused on trying to understand this. in many cases, it goes back to education barriers. you know, if you don't get access when you're a kid to a high quality education, then that sets you back on what kind of jobs that you can get as a, as a young adult and as an adult, and these things tend to perpetuate generation to generation. so we have a very active research Focus to try to understand what some of these barriers are, to then hopefully equip local, state, federal government leaders with the information they need to make the best policy choices they can. sounds like a wonderful Institute and thanks for starting that. uh, you've been outspoken against crypto currencies. can you elaborate? elaborate on that a little bit? well, you know it's been like bitcoin's been around now for 12, 13, 14 years, and I always ask people. I'll ask you- okay, let's make this interactive- has anybody in this audience ever bought something with Bitcoin? and I don't mean I don't mean you bought Bitcoin, I mean you bought something using Bitcoin: a sandwich, a book, anything, what? what beer? you bought beer using Bitcoin? tell me? I wish I could get you a microphone, because I always ask this question and everyone's like crickets, uh, and people online right now. right now, there's some Bitcoin Bros online who are just outraged by me asking this question because they say I bought a beer yesterday. I'm not questioning whether or not some Bitcoin evangelist can do back flips to find some use for this. I'm questioning whether regular people in their ordinary life, after 12 years of this being in existence, have any usefulness of it, and overwhelmingly, the answer I get is no. as opposed to. let's just do a contrast. AI has tons of hype, tons of hype. well, I just learned an anecdote that somebody's veterinarian- they took their dog into the vet to get a checkup- that apparently the veterinarian has AI listen to the to the vet session and then create a summary of the session and email it to both the patient and the veterinarian and it goes in the file, all right, that's actually useful. wow, so 12 years in, or 13 years in Bitcoin, it basically has shown no actual usefulness in the real world, uh, other than as a tool of speculation. and so, look, I compare it to Beanie Babies. if you want to collect Beanie Babies, God bless you, collect beanie babies. but I'm just cautioning people who think this is an actual investment vehicle of usefulness, we learned by the way. it was supposed to be an inflation hedge and then, when inflation took off and the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, Bitcoin got crushed, and so Bitcoin is not an inflation hedge, it is just another speculative asset, like a meme stock. I'm not opposed to meme stocks. if you want to trade meme stocks, God bless you, trade meme stocks. buy Beanie Babies, buy Bitcoin, that's up to you. I'm just cautioning you about thinking it's an actual investment vehicle or an actual currency. I'm a little worried about a currency. see that it's advertising on television, which seem to be doing they're talking about you know their fees are cheaper and everything else and international fees, but uh, they're advertising a currency on television, which is it's weird. so, okay, what about digital currencies? well, another, so a parallel discussion is the idea of a central bank digital currency. so forget Bitcoin. imagine the Central Bank of the United States issued a central bank digital currency. first thing I would say to you is digital currencies, already EX. today I can send you. you could send me $5 today with venmo or PayPal or zel. those are digital currencies. so what is it that a central bank digital currency could do that venmo or PayPal or zel can't do? I've been asking this question now for five or six years and all I get is a bunch of word salad answers. so so far, what? just like Bitcoin, nobody can explain to me what problem this is actually solving, and so you know we're studying it. so far, I remain quite skeptical that there's any usefulness in this, uh, other than- and I'm not- nobody at the FED wants to do this, other than putting the government in a position to monitor your transactions or things like that, which nobody at the FED wants to do. so you know, it's fine to study it, but so far, I remain deeply skeptical that there's any value proposition of the American people for for a digital currency, just like there so far hasn't been for Bitcoin. we've got a couple minutes left. you've gone through my 15 questions, so basically I can talk about the Denver Nuggets for a couple minutes, or or or I I can ask you who your favorite President was, and be careful, because Teddy Roosevelt was just here. he was just here. so I think I have a Teddy Roosevelt story. I'm a, I'm a history junkie, American history junkie. if you have to, if you make me pick a president, I'm going to pick Lincoln. uh, for all the obvious reasons. but it's more than just a cliche. The more I've studied history, the more stunning Lincoln is in the anals of History. um, but I'll tell you a, I think, a Teddy Roosevelt story, which is: I like steak okay, so I'm always looking for how do I get a better sear on my steak? and then somebody sent me an article that allegedly Teddy Roosevelt would Grill his steaks directly on charcoal. he had a big charcoal pit. he'd get hot, he'd fling this the stakes on the charcoal. so I tried it. it's amazing. and you can't do it with lump charcoal, you have to use it. you can't do it with briquettes, you have to do it with lump charcoal and basically you have to be very careful that you don't overcook it. but you get a heck of a sear, the charcoal Burns off and you get a great flavor. so it takes some experimentation, but I uh, allegedly that came from Teddy Roosevelt, so he's my inspiration for how I cook steaks: awesome, very good. so, um, thank you very much for being here. we really appreciate the conversation and discussion. it's been educational. I always enjoy coming out here. I always learn a lot. I got meetings the rest of the day. uh, this is an important part of our district, important part of the economy. uh, I'm grateful for what you all do and I'm grateful for the in insights you share with me. so, thank you for having me. thank [Applause] you for