https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/a-conversation-with-neel-kashkari-at-the-2024-milken-institute-global-conference-

A conversation with Neel Kashkari at the 2024 Milken Institute Global Conference

May 7, 2024

the 2024 Milken Institute Global Conference

Neel Kashkari

welcome to the session on US economic overview for part one. please welcome to the stage president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neil kashari, moderated by federal reserve and economics reporter for the New York Times, Gina smik. [Applause] [Music]: Neil, thank you so much, um, nice to see you. nice to see you. um. so you have an essay out this morning on the possibility that the neutral rate, so the dividing line between monetary policy that Stokes the economy and monetary policy that slows it down, might have risen, and I wonder if you could kind of Briefly summarize for us your takeaways, what your conclusions are here and then we can go from there, sure? well, we're facing um a puzzling economic environment where the good news is we had rapid disinflation in the second half of last year, much faster than we had expected, so that's really good news- to around a 3% inflation level, uh, and we had much stronger economic growth than we had anticipated. those two things are a little bit puzzling. you would think if monetary policy is bringing inflation down, it would also be restraining economic growth. but we didn't see that. now in the first quarter of this year, uh, conditions have changed a little bit. inflation seems to have gone sideways, while economic growth has remained resilient. so it's led me to question: is monetary policy having as much downward pressure on demand as I would have otherwise expected? and one place I look at is I look at the housing market. the housing market has seen some evidence of slow down it. mortgage rates have gone up a lot, but housing overall, the housing market is also remain remarkably resilient, far more resilient than I would have guessed, having pushed mortgage rates- 30-year mortgage rates- up to around 75%. so when I look at this constellation of data, it makes me wonder: are there some dynamics of the reopening US economy that has led the neutral interest rate to go up, at least in the short run, so that, instead of putting two feet down on the brakes, perhaps monetary policy is only putting one foot down on the brakes, or maybe it's not putting very much downward pressure at all? and so these are. I was Raising questions and laying out some of the evidence that I'm looking at. obviously, as a policy maker, you have to come up with answers. know, I wonder what you think this means for the trajectory for interest rates. you know, is it possible we're going to have another rate hike? what do you think is warranted at this stage, I think right now, I would say a few different scenarios that I'll lay out. I think the most likely scenario is where we are right now, which is just we stay put for an extended period of time until we get clarity on: is disinflation in fact continuing or has it in fact stalled out? uh, I don't think we know the answer to that. so I would say the most likely scenario is we sit here for an extended period of time. if, uh, disinflation starts to come again and INF inflation starts to tick back down or we saw some weakening, marked weakening- in the labor market, then that might lead us to to cut back on interest rates. or if we got convinced eventually that inflation is embedded or entrenched now at 3% and that we need to go higher, we would do that if we needed to. I think that's not my most likely scenario, but I also can't rule it out. okay, interesting, and I guess what? what kind of are you looking for as you try and figure out? if that third scenario is actually the case, you know what would make you concerned that inflation was embedded? well, one is, of course, just looking at the actual inflation data. I think one thing, that's: uh, I think the committee is doing really well right now is we're all- I think appropriately- data dependent. we have different outlooks for where the economy may be going, but we're all very focused on what the actual inflation data is telling us. so, first and foremost, what's happening to inflation? we have a dual Mandate, of course. what's happening to the labor market? the jobs report on Friday was a little bit softer than expected, but not a soft labor, not a soft job report. so continued to look at the labor side of the economy I'm. one of the things I'm looking at is the housing market. I'm looking at new leases. like we know, there's a mathematical relationship between new lease rates and then, over the course of the next year or two, those roll over into actual inflation data, housing inflation data. curiously, the new lease rates seem to have ticked up in the last month or two. that's a little bit uh, concerning to me. I wonder, wonder, why that is. why would? if we're putting so much downward pressure on real estate, why are new lease rates ticking up right now? that's also a place that I'm focused on. okay, interesting. and then, on the flip side, you know, what kind of evidence do you need to see to make you feel confident that inflation's actually under control and you can go ahead and cut rates, like what? what is the bar there? I think on the inflation side we saw rapid disinflation in the second half of uh last year. then, as I said it, it went up in January and it kind of moved sideways in February and March if we started to see some more inflation prints headed in the right direction, back down to our 3% Target. we know we've had three bad inflation readings in a row. uh, we shouldn't get faked out by one good inflation reading. I think. for me, I would need to see multiple positive inflation readings suggesting that the disinflationary process is on track. multiple meaning three or you know, it'll be the constellation of data, so it'll be uh, more than one, two, three inflation prints. looking at the labor market, looking at housing as well. yeah, you know, I got to try. um, I wonder you know, obviously, as of the last summary of economic projections that you all released, the committee median was still expecting to make three interest rate Cuts this year. most Wall Street economists have sort of downplayed that. at this stage it seems unlikely that you'll have time. I wonder what your forecast is at this stage do you think those three cuts are possible? how many? how many would you expect? at this point? I'll say: in March I dotted, I jotted down two cuts for this year back in March. um, I'm not sure where I'm going to end up in in June. uh, there's still some more data to come in between now and then. it's possible I would stay at two. it's possible I'd go to one or even zero. uh, we need to look at the consolation of data. I know this is not a satisfactory answer, but it's the honest answer that, uh, it's very hard for me. I know it wouldn't be more than the two I jotted down in March. uh, it' either be that or less. we've obviously got a presidential election in November. if you guys cut interest rates in September or just on the cusp of that election, it seems likely that you will be in the headlines right around the time of the vote. is that something that would in any way sort of factor into your decision- making? like is: is that a consideration as you think about what comes next with rides? you know, if we allow that to affect our decision- making, then in a sense we're allowing politics to drive what we're doing and we're all absolutely committed to not let that happen. and one of the things that you know, you all pay close attention, most of you, to what the FED is saying. we are being incredibly transparent about the data that we're looking at. so when you see the data, you ought to be able to figure out, hey, this either means they're going to be a little more doish or a little bit more hawkish. so I think the data is going to guide us and I think the the data is also going to give everybody comfort that, hey, we see why they're making the decisions that they're making. it's not, I can tell you, it's not- going to be based on politics or the election. yeah, interesting. you know, I'm reporter at the New York Times. I get a lot of reader email and it's always interesting to see the trends that sort of evolve in my reader emails. and recently, a question I'm getting a lot from our readers is why, if inflation has come down below 3%, is the Fed so bent on getting it all the way to two? you know why do you need to hit that extra mile? why not just say: this is fine, we've basically won. it was, you know, was 9%. now it's 3%. this is a big Improvement. um, and I I always wonder how you would answer that question. sure, I mean it is back to- and I know you're not going to be surprised by this- it is about our credibility of saying we committed to 2%, we met it, we can achieve that through our policy tools and we are going to achieve it. and the thing is, if we stop short and we say 3% is good enough, then that undermines our credibility. and the next time that there's any type of an inflation Spike, maybe you all and the markets and the public will think, well, maybe they're going to stop short again and maybe it'll be three and a half or maybe it'll be four. and so we said 2%, we are committed to hitting 2%, we will hit 2%. uh, and that's the best thing that we can do for the long-term competitiveness of the US economy. I want to Circle back to your inflation forecast, because you kind of laid out a couple of different scenarios, but you didn't tell us exactly what your most base case inflation forecast is at this stage. what, what are you expecting, is most likely at this point? right now, it looks like the econom is in a very good place. uh, economic momentum is is maintaining there's a lot of resilience. it seems like things are kind of at steady state. so if I had to pick a scenario today, it seems like we're going to kind of go sideways for a while and under that scenario that, would tell me, lead me as a policy maker to say we ought to just sit with interest rates for longer than expected and allow them to bite. you know, one of the things that we hear is that maybe because so many Americans refinance their mortgages when mortgage rates dropped during the pandemic, that there's a a factor that it monetary policy is not passing through to housing as quickly as it otherwise would, because people are not feeling the bite of higher mortgage rates yet. if that's true- and I think there's some truth to that- then it may take longer for monetary policy to be fully felt by the housing market and by the economy more broadly. so that may guide us towards being more patient, uh, and seeing the effects of our policy actions. that's interesting, because if we're in some sort of steady state and if it's the case that the transmission to the real economy is just a lot less, you know, potent than it used to be, you know mortgage, mortgage terms- they 30 years. that seems like potentially a really long like what? what changes just by leaving rates high or at this level for for an extended period of time? that makes you confident that would actually be enough to get inflation down. well, I think the last part is: you know, that would be where I'm not sure how confident I would be at that point, but we would have to try. I mean, I think the the bar for us raising is quite high, but it's not infinite. I mean there is a a limit when we'd say, okay, we need to do more. I think much more likely we would just sit here for longer than we expect or the public expects right now until we see what effect our monetary policy have is having. if you look back at the vulker era of raising interest rates quite dramatically, very quickly, it took a few years for mortgage rates to really start bending up in terms of the average rates that uh, homeowners were paying on their mortgages. so even in the vulcar era it took some time for the pass through to be felt to the housing market. so I would want to look at what are people actually paying? I mean, we do know, for example, credit card rates. if you have a balance, those are variable. so you're seeing some delinquencies rise in credit cards for subprime Borrowers. you're seeing delinquencies rise in Autos, also for generally for subprime borrowers. so it's not as though monetary policy is not having an effect on the economy. it is. it's just not having as much an effect as quickly as I would have guessed. yeah, that's interesting. do you think that Weighing on sort of the, the very interest rate sensitive portion of the economy, which tends to be sort of the lower half of the income scale, the people who use credit card debt, the people who use Auto debt, is that enough to get inflation down, or do you have to have a broader effect than that? ultimately, I we believe, and I believe monetary policy essentially affects the whole economy, some sectors more quickly, some sectors longer. uh, we can do what we need to do to get inflation down using monetary policy. I'm confident of that. the de the art is: we want to do that while preserving a strong labor market. uh, so far, you know, we've made a lot of progress. uh, we've had some help from the supply side. uh, but we need to finish the job. I actually wanted to ask about the supply side because one thing that some economists will raise is monetary policy obviously affects demand in this cycle. it's kind of a weird cycle. we are very housing Supply constrained and obviously monetary policy also affects housing Supply. we've seen less building. it's sck back up recently but in general in multif family and single family home constructions weigh down, which means less Supply in the future. and you know, one of the arguments is this could lead to higher rents and higher inflation down the road and I wonder how you think about that argument. is it a concern? are the side effects of monetary policy something you need to worry about at this point? I think it's a timing issue. I think monetary policy and the and the monetary policy cycle that we're focused on is really the next two or three years to get you know, to get the soft Landing, uh, get to our, our goals. I mean it'll be H, hopefully be faster than that, but it's over an arc of two or three years. the supply side effects that you're referencing, I think are much longer term effects. I mean, I think I'm in no way suggesting this, but if we had a high interest rate environment for an extended period of time, then that would have an effect. you would have Capital being allocated to other sectors of the economy rather than to housing, and so that would lead to less housing Supply. uh, but I don't think that that's the same thing as the monetary policy timing and cycle that we're operating under. okay, interesting. when it comes to financial conditions, they are obviously a lot tighter than they were at the start of the hiking cycle, but they are considerably looser than they were last fall. and I wonder if that is something that worries you. is it something you think is appropriate? how? how do you think about where Financial conditions sit today? no, it's a good question. um, one of the me. one of the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy is, of course, through financial markets, and financial markets are so wired for exuberant. you know, I look at this. you had three negative inflation prints in a row and Market started to take that on board and get a little bit concerned. and then you had one somewhat positive jobs report and then there's back to the races again, exuberance has returned. I mean, it's like that's a pretty strong disposition to exuberance in financial markets. uh, so that does give me concern. and again, what? what are the financial markets telling us about the St to monetary policy? if, mon, if the financial markets are this exuberant? do financial markets? are they behaving in a manner consistent with monetary policy that is, tamping down demand in the economy? that's a little bit of a heads scratcher, and looking at financial markets is also a a challenge for us, because financial markets are obviously paying attention to what we say and what we do. so in my, in the essay that you referenced, I speculated that could it be that we and markets are misperceiving the neutral rate, that we and markets think the neutral rate is lower and that's what's resulting in this inverted yield curve, but actually the neutral rate may be higher? well, could the financial markets be paying attention to what we're saying about the neutral rate and then we're influencing the Market's judgment? so here, for example, there's this thing called the Blue Chip survey of financial forecasters, one of many indicators that we look at. I'm always skeptical of the Blue Chip survey because it's basically a bunch of former fed economists who are out working on Wall Street, and so we're basically Talking to Ourselves. it's like, great, we look in the mirror and we like what we see. I mean, that's shouldn't be that comforting, uh. and so where are the independent pieces of data, uh, that can give us some guidance? and it's complicated, I wonder. going back to the r trajectory, you know chair pal, last week during his press conference after your fomc meeting, mentioned that one scenario in which you all could cut rates is if the labor market it starts to just go to Pieces unexpectedly, and it sounded as though that was sort of independent of what happened with inflation. he didn't specify but he didn't, you know, have a have an inflation trajectory during. during that scenario. I wonder a, do you think that's true? if inflation stays stable but the labor market falls apart, would that be a reasonable reason to cut? and B, how much of a sort of falling apart in the labor market would you need to see? like what? what would the standard be there? it's a good question and I don't have a good answer for for you. this you know we've talked about at the fomc that we of course have our dual mandate- stable prices and maximum employment- and that if these two goals were intention, that we would take a balanced approach. now we have not exactly defined what that means. I think each of the 19 participants would have their own interpretation of what balanced means. let me give you a very simple example. for the sake of math, I'm not advocating this view, but it'll be clear. so we have a 2% inflation Target if inflation right now is running at about 3%. so we're missing our inflation Target by 50%. if we think the maximum rate of unemployment in steady state is around 4%, a 50% Miss would be 6%. so one one model could be 3% inflation and 6% unemployment. those two things are now equally missing. I'm not saying that's the right comparison, uh, but that's. we have not articulated to each other exactly how we would trade off and I think that would really come down to the Judgment of the various policy makers around the table. again, looking at the constellation of data, yeah, absolutely up to this point, in this conversation we've mostly focused on sort of the, the median Outlook. what's the most likely outcome? I wonder, what do you see as the tail risks? right now, it seems like there's a lot of uncertainty out in the world with commercial real estate, with geopolitics like what is keeping you up at night? a lot of things. one, first and foremost, is underlying inflation. you know, is underlying inflation actually land? are we Landing softly at 3% inflation? okay, that's not good enough. that keeps me up at night. the other Risk, by the way, is: is there, all this pent up impact of monetary policy that has yet to be felt by the economy, and this is going to hit, and would it hit quickly. that also keeps me up at night. those are, those are in conflict with each other, those two, um, and then it's these. you know, the signals that we're getting are we? are we misreading something in the economy? you know, for example, productivity. us productivity growth looks quite strong right now. that's great. why is it so strong? uh, productivity tends to be a residual of all of the other economic calculations that are made. a lot of times the residuals can be wrong. they can be revised. uh, is that going to be maintained? I mean, there are big fundamental questions in the economy right now, setting aside all the geopolitical risk that you just mentioned as well. so there's a lot, um, there's a lot of uncertainty that we're trying to navigate. if the accumulated rate hikes are just sort of like hanging in the wings W waiting to Clopper the economy, what is the mechanism by which that would happen? yeah, boy, that's a great one. I mean, I'm not seeing it. I talked to a lot of businesses, large and small, and IAL- I actually asked this question- of some big businesses, and most businesses that I talk to, feel quite confident. they don't have as much pricing power as they had a year or two ago, but underlying demand seems strong and they're it's easier to find workers, but they're still having to compete to find workers. so I'm not seeing the evidence of that, but I also know- you know I can't rule it out- or it could be some Shock. it could be that. you know one of the things I learned in ' 08, having been, uh, running the tarp during the financial crisis: a lot of the risks you don't exactly know where they are. so a lot of. there's a lot of attention on Commercial Real Estate risks. my guess is we don't actually appreciate where all the risks are buried and my guess is that there are a lot of financial Market participants who don't even realize they have some of these risks. um, and it's not just going to be us firms, it's going to be Global firms as well. uh, so there may be some surprises to come there when some of those risk materialized, and could that be a spark that that catalyzes some broader uh response? I'm not sure. I think with that we are about out of time, me kashari. thank you so much for an interesting conversation. thank you, Gina. thanks for having me.