https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/Neel-Kashkari-in-conversation-with-Ginni-Rometty-at-the-Economic-Club-of-Minnesota

Neel Kashkari in conversation with Ginni Rometty at the Economic Club of Minnesota

February 12, 2024

the Economic Club of Minnesota

Neel Kashkari

it's my pleasure to introduce uh today's guests. Jenny redti was the ninth chair president and CEO of IBM. under her leadership, the 100-year-old company reinvented 50% of its portfolio, built a 25 billion hybrid Cloud business and established leadership in Ai and Quantum Computing. redti also drove record results in diversity and inclusion and supported the explosive growth of an innovated high school program to prepare the workforce of the future in over 28 countries. through her work with the business Round Table, redti helped redefine the purpose of the corporation. she has been named Fortune's number one most powerful woman three years in a row, is a member of the National Academy of engineering and has been been honored with the designation of officer in the French lean Donaire. today, redti serves on multiple boards and co-chairs 110, a coalition committed to upskilling, hiring and promoting 1 million black Americans without fouryear degrees by 2030 into family, sustaining jobs and careers. she's married to Mark redti, who is with her here today, and she is the author of the bestselling book good power: creating positive change in our lives, work and World. Neil kashari has been president CEO of Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis since January of 2016. he serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, bringing the ninth Federal Reserve District's perspective to monetary policy discussions in Washington. in addition, Neil oversees the Minneapolis fed operations and leads its many initiatives. he was instrumental in establishing the opportunity and inclusive growth Institute, whose mission is to ensure that world-class research helps to improve the economic well-being of all Americans. most recently, he supported the expansion of the center for Indian Country development, which advances the prosperity of native nations and Indigenous communities through actionable data and research. Neil earned his bachelor's and master's degrees in mechanical engineering ering from the University of Illinois. he became an aerospace engineer, developing technology for NASA missions. eventually, he turned to finance and public policy. he earned his MBA from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, joined Goldman Sachs and served in several senior positions at the US Department of Treasury, including overseeing the troubled asset relief program, or tarp, during the financial crisis. before joining the Minneapolis fed, he spent four years at Pimco and then, in 2014, ran for governor of California on a platform platform focused on Economic Opportunity. he lives with his wife, Christine, children ulie and Tuma, and Newfoundland dog Webster in Orono, Minnesota, and with that I'm going to call Jenny and our leader Neil forward to have their conversation. wonderful, thank you, uh. thank you, Tim, for the very warm introduction. great to see everybody again. always great to be back with you here at the economic Club of Minnesota. I met Jenny last summer. we were at a conference together and she gave this remarkable talk and we were chatting and you're going to see in a moment just how engaging she is and how experienced she is. and then she mentioned that she comes through Minnesota a couple times a year and my eyes lit up and I said, well, actually, let me know next time you're coming through Minnesota we might have a wonderful event for you. so thank you, Jenny, for joining us here at the economic Club, really appreciate it. my my pleasure. and thank you. when we got to meet I. we have the same views on a lot of things too, though. so that was it was my pleasure to do it for you. wonderful, thank you. well, I want to start. we're gonna. we have a lot of ground to cover. Jenny's career is remarkable. I want to get to a lot of her Leadership Lessons From IBM that are relevant to businesses today, that we're all struggling with today, but to set that up. and then I want to talk about Ai and a bunch of other things that she knows a lot about. to set that up. let's start with your personal Story. You've spoken about this, you've written about it. I think your personal story, as I learned about it, really sets the foundation. some of the things you faced as a, as a child, set the foundation for how you viewed leadership throughout your journey. so maybe we could you start at the start. yeah, I, I well, I'll start there, but I have to say, looking around the room, I never really thought much about it until I went to write this book, which is a long story of how I got kind of pushed it. we- I told Neil, a mutual friend of ours, Hank pson, kind of convinced me I should write a book, book and uh- and I would just recommend it now in retrospect, as painful as it was- that it's probably worth for those of you a little bit further in your careers to take the time to think back to the beginning, and I know most people that have read the book, who know me, they're like: oh, I wish I'd read this earlier. now I know exactly why you're like you are and uh, I'm not sure they always meant that as a compliment, but that was, um, what they say. so just it it does, as I've reflected back, um, really, it's the foundation of a lot of stuff that we'll talk about to day. so, um, what Neil's referring to is I was raised by what I would call just a group of strong women, but who each suffered immense tragedies in their life. um, my great grandma was the last person alive in her family in bellarus. uh, all were killed in the world war and she came to America and she would never speak English. she would clean bathrooms in Chicago at the Wrigley building, save every dime, and it would be because of what she would save that one day we would be able to have a, a car. my grandma, um W, widowed twice and by the time she was probably 30. uh, would then run a lamp store and she would every dime she saved. making lampshades by hand would be the reason one day we would. we would come off the street and have a house. and my mother? when I was very young, um, my father abandoned my mother and there were four of us kids and he left her with no money and no home. so we were home, we homeless, no money on welfare, and my mom was just so determined- uh, this wouldn't be how this story should end and she'd only had a high school degree, never worked um outside the home, uh, and she was just, she went back to school, got just a little bit of Education, finally enough to get a job eventually enough to get us off of federal programs and Aid and um, and it has a happy ending. and I I always say I tell the story like not for anyone to look at me or my mom as a victim. I actually need to celebrate my mom and my grandma and my great grandma because you know, they always taught me it doesn't matter how bad life is, there is always a way forward. and my mom taught us you know what. she was never going to let my dad Define her as a loser or anything else. and she taught us: only you define who you are in life. now, you know she never said it, but that's what we learned watching her, and so to me that kind of forms the basis of who I am, because I end up believing it's really true. we were just talking about our country. that is true for a person or a company or a country. you know, if you don't Define yourself, someone else will um by by their actions and so, um, that's kind of the basis. so to me there's always a Way Forward, doesn't matter how hard life gets, and that's kind of how, and I got some hard jobs after that and that's how I always looked at them, thank you. so let's let's go a little bit forward. and you went to Northwestern for, uh, how'd you end up in? you know we have a lot of young people today. how'd you end up at that college? I think about my own decision where I went to college. when you're 17 or 18 years old, you make these decisions with a little bit of information. how did you end up where you ended up and what was your journey to IBM? well, I, I know I met a lot of the young folks here, which I'm so glad you do that- but unlike today where, I think, those of you with kids- I'm watching my nephew- he applies to 20 schools. I could afford to apply to two. Okay, so there were just two, and they had to be schools that would give you financial aid if you couldn't afford to be there, and so I applied to a state school. I thought I could for sure get in, and one stretch school that was Northwestern, and then just prayed and I was lucky enough to get into Northwestern and so, um, both in Chicago, couldn't get on a plane, had to be somewhere you could get to in a car. and uh, University of Illinois in Chicago and in Northwestern. so that's what brought me there and I had a love of math and so I started in engineering and that's where I always stayed. and then what was your first job? oh so this is funny for those. um, are there anybody in a car company here here, before I offend anyone, got to be sure about this. I'm always we are live streaming this, but go ahead. uh, my, my best friend- now one of my best friends, Mary bar right. so I always say to her: Mary, she runs General Motors. I worked for General Motors at first. I got really again lucky. a professor said: look, I know you're paying for school yourself and financial aid. North GM has this wonderful program. if you can get this scholarship, they'll pay for everything. and I did get the scholarship. so I felt a great obligation to go work there for a few years. and the only reason I tell the story: there's a good lesson in it for the young people. I went to work for General Motors and I was doing cars and buses, and it's not that I don't love cars and buses right and um, getting called in the middle of the night like why is the assembly lying down? and all I'm like whoa. and my husband had said: you know, you've got this engineering degree and you love computers, like you know, why are you doing this? and um, I said I learned at a really young age the difference between a job and a career. and it was a job, job to me. right, I could go, I could do it easily, but that's not a career, and so I didn't have passion. I say Mary, Mary, you love cars, I do not love cars, and so so I didn't want to offend any car people here and uh, so that's what took me to IBM, got it, got it okay, so I'm going to jump ahead now. um, You, you write about running towards conflict is something that you're drawn to, and I'll say: this is something you and I have in common. uh, not, I don't. I would say not for the sake of conflict, but there's opportunity. if everybody's afraid to go somewhere, then there's an opportunity there to go explore it. in Minnesota, we tend to be conflict avoidant culturally. um, fair enough, okay. so talk about running towards conflict. were you always this way? how did other people react. how do you use it as a, as a tool? well, so this is a I. I found Neil had mentioned this to me and this is ironic for me to end up back in Minnesota on this, because I think the first time this came came alive to me was Minnesota and I, uh, early in my career, I spent a good five or six years communing here every week, um, cons, Consulting to some companies here when IBM was building a Consulting business. but it was the first time I learned a phrase, because I, we were doing work and I think, well, didn't we agree on this already? and it would be open again, and and I'm like we got to go back through this, but didn't we do it? and someone said to me, oh, you don't understand, everyone votes and the polls never close here. and I said, ah, and I was like this is interesting to me. same same client then taught me um, because I, I was still young and I was like, okay, trying to get them to move forward. and I remember in a big board meeting- and afterwards it was some bad news, I had to deliver. and he said to me: um, you know, and I thought he was going to yell at me and he said: I think you have a velvet hammer. and I said: what was that? what I'm like? is that an insult? he's like: no, no, no. you told me really bad stuff in a way that I could do something with it and it would was kind of like my first. these two sides of a coin, introduction to conflict, of like, is it a bad thing or a good thing to be in conflict? and so I. one of the big points in the book I try to make is, in today's world like, nothing's black and white, it's all full attention, it's all full of conflict and that if you would run toward it, I feel really strongly. I've worked with people, I watch them. people would say this is the most horrible thing to work on and somebody go. I'll take that and I'm like, why are they always volunteering? and what I would watch was usually 95% of the time they came out in a better place than where it started and I thought this is a very interesting thing. if, if you would like, don't be afraid and go toward it, You' say you'll explore something new, I would find i' usually, if I really listened, I could get something to a better place at the end of the day and I would have learned something out of it. so I'm a big advocate of trying to get people to go towards conflict. and and the last thing- and someone asked me about this- a little bit of IBM history. I also feel most answers aren't black and white and that doesn't mean gray and compromise. I think the other thing I learned about conflict is there's usually a third way through something. if you sit in the mess long enough, you will find it, and I kind of- I I wish that way sort of in government today. there people would- it's not like your way or my way, you would really- and you know, I always felt, even when I did a lot of work with education in government, one thing I could get, no matter who they, what their beliefs were, people cared about jobs. it didn't matter if you're Republican Democrat, it didn't matter who you were, and if I could listen hard enough to those issues I could usually make progress on all agendas, and so that idea of there's always a third way through was the other thing. so when you, when you said you love conflict, I kind of you're the birthplace for me starting to love conflict. it was Minnesota. it was all those years in Minnesota taught me, ironically, to to look for and love conflict. but let me ask you though, um, looking back on your younger, even younger self, then do you Rec recognized maybe you loved conflict the whole time? h? i the only thing I would have to say about that- being the oldest, and they're my sister's siblings and brother. they're not here- um, I think I was always The Peacemaker, so I think that teaches you a little bit about conflict. I mean, I think we felt my mom had it so horrible like the last thing we could do was cause more trouble for her, so I was always the one like trying to like take care of all the issues and so that we didn't cause more problems, and I think that's what it PRI. interesting, interesting, okay, how about you? where did yours come from? oh, boy sounds. yours sounds like from a fighting background or something. mine's from such a good place. yours is from a bad place. it sounds like no, no, I thought we agreed we weren't going to do this. we weren't going to have you turn any questions around on me. um, my husband times how long it takes me to do that. yeah, uh, it's funny that the Federal Reserve people are generally. it's very Minnesotan- people are generally conflict avoidant. one of my colleagues- I'm not going to name- says that I'm conflict seeking. uh, and I actually think that there's truth to that. but I'm again, I'm conflict seeking because if everybody's afraid to explore over here- CU- it's scary- then that's where I want to go, because there's probably some stuff to go- something good- over there- that is is left. uh, agree that you know people haven't looked at it yet. so, um, let's talk about you. you write about a lot about the importance of managers and mentors throughout your career in IBM. can you give some examples? when has that really been important to you? yeah, and as I looked around the room again, you've got, um, we got- people across the whole spectrum of life and their careers here. and is the reason I take some time to write about this topic is, I think a lot of people will say to me I need a mentor or I need a sponsor, I need this one person, and I actually really believe that's the wrong way to view life and I I feel so strongly that anyone you talk to- like I learned a lot from yel- if you look at anyone as a mentor, you don't have to tell them they're the mentor, but if you just treat them with respect and ask them questions, they will be your mentor and sponsor. I've never met someone who wouldn't, and therefore I say to to. if I'm talking to younger people, I'd be like: look at everyone that way as a mentor, don't try to there. it isn't like that some one person pulls you up through the world. it's more about if you were willing to ask questions and ask more than you talk. okay, it's like I'm going to talk a lot up here, but in real life, you know, ask more questions and you answer, and I think you'll have tons of of mentors. now I would make question. you say, what about the ones I had? look, I grew up in really great companies. IBM at that time had a very big presence here in in Minnesota, in Rochester, um, and the biggest thing I think I got from those mentors were two things. so those of us who are mentors now, I think one. they taught me to lead with values instead of rules, and I- and like the one story that burns in my mind, I will always remember- I'm a very young manager and I had a man who worked for me who was telling- telling dirty jokes- I guess that's what you call them today- or you know, off color, and this is back in the ' 80s, and people were uncomfortable and I went to my boss- I'm a new manager- and I went to the boss and told him about it and the guy was a top performer, the top performer. and my boss says to me: well, this is easy. you tell him to stop immediately or you fire him. I'm like, but he's our best performing. that's got nothing to do with this, and like. such a simple thing would always leave this in my mind about value based decisions, and- and I see that issue with young companies now- that when they don't have really good values, they get very whipsawed around on their decisions, and so I learned that. so that would be my one thing is, as a as those of us now mentoring people, I think, teaching them to lead with values. and the second thing, though, is, I think, the most important. they always believed in me more than I believed in myself, and I think that, to me, is like one of the greatest values as a mentor, and I see this with so many young people today that if your role is just to tell them- and I see it particularly with women, that you can do it. no, no, go ahead, take that risk, you can do it. so those, that would be my two. that's great, you don't want to answer it either. you, how about? well, one of the things you said, one of the things that you said about sponsorship I get I hear the lot- is: I need a sponsor, and as though like there's this very godmother that's going to come along and just tap you on the shoulder and make your career. and my answer, when I thought about what they meant, is: I said: sponsorship is earned. right, you want mentors to share with you what they know to coach you, but then ultimately you have to deliver and like. so Hank Paulson, somebody that our mutual friend, former treasury secretary, My Mentor in many ways, and I give him great credit. I learned a tremendous amount from him, but I also recognized I did a really good job for him. so when he came along and gave me promotions, it was in his own interest to give me the promotion because it gave me more ability to take on bigger assignments for him. so it wasn't- uh, anyway, it wasn't the notion of sponsorship: somebody in giving you something, it's somebody recognizing in you the job that you're able to do. yeah, when I was really young I'd had I worked for someone like- and I feel like I've apprenticed my whole life- but he used to say to me, if someone asks you for help, you give it to them early, because you're going to learn something. and and I really this idea of networking people talk about, which I also think is people like: oh, I just got to get to know more people. I don't believe in that either. it all came from who you actually helped along the way and I say that, and then in those moments of need, they mysteriously do come back to you over. it could be decade later, right, but it comes back to you, absolutely, absolutely. okay, let's jump around a little bit. um, one of the big challenges that IBM has faced over time that we're all wrestling with right now, is work from home. how do you make it work? what are your Lessons Learned? IBM was at this much earlier than the rest. we, the rest of us- learned confronted it because of covid and the postco. just tell us about work from home. what did you learn? well, for how many people are well? what's the right answer? what do I want? how many people are still sorting out what work from home means. oh, nobody, okay, three, four, okay. are the rest of you at home? okay, how many know it, love it? okay, how many are sleeping right now? I'm not sure. how many aren't sure how to answer the question? question, okay. so work from home? when you say we were at it earlier, you know, I feel like that. was it that the country song, like I Was Country When Country Wasn't Cool, or something like that, I don't know, and so just, I think was the nature of our business. so I can remember, I happen to, like, whenever I'll do like a media interview or something, I will write some notes after, mostly because I want to see if they misquote me, which is typical and um, but I'll, you know, just remember what I said. and, um, I can remember when the pandemic just hit and I was going on CNBC, it was March 14th and the first questions like about work from home, and you was all that: what is it, what do you do? and I can remember saying, because we've done it for so long, I said: but my biggest learning of work from home is teams have to learn how to self-govern themselves. you can't dictate rules and I don't think everyone like we had to come to learn that right. so it's like you can't say, oh, pick your three days, pick your two days, or or we're all going to do these days. and so self-governance was to me like one of the biggest learnings. those of you that have have worked from home teams have to learn to self-govern because they got to get work done and so, in a really mature company that did a lot of work from home, they kind of learn that over Decades of how to do that, and so that was one of my big learnings. but I will tell you the other. I think work from home's like a pendulum, you know, goes too far this way. it goes too far this way. and there was probably a good year. I was like on the front page of the Wall Street Journal, for we had made people come back to an office. now this would be 2014, it was marketing people. we had maybe 800 in the United States and it had devolved to. I think. I had like, uh, four in each State and they could each work in their basement in four different corners, and we're like, okay, this is like super hard, you can't get work done this way, and we told people they had to come back to their offices- eight hubs in the United States, oh my God, you'd have thought I was killing all of them- and, um, I'd gotten an one of the emails I I can remember so vividly. it was: do you understand? if I have to do this, I will no longer have time to be the mayor or the coach of the softball teams. I'm like, well, this is kind of precisely the point, and so I I'm like, yep, that's, that is a big Pro. I mean, appreciate you owing up to this, you know, and um, but that's what I mean on this pendulum thing, and so I think what I learned out of that was it wasn't about rules. again, I think we we were more about, and this was one of the things we'd had to do, which is introduce agile working- and those of you that you know now that's common place. at the early 2010s, that was not in a company of a half a million people to do Agile, which you need small, multi-is disciplinary teams together to get work done, and and so, versus telling people you can't work from home, it was really about changing how their work was done, and that was more what I learned about from that Essence, and I would just say the last thing. even now, I think I even kind of hate the words work from home. I really think it's just more about do you have the right flexibility, you know kind of policies, because that's really what people want at the end of the day individually. if I've got to take care of something, I feel free that I can go do it. yeah, I. I'm curious why you had that on your list, though, do you? so we are at the Minneapolis fed, I'm in the, I'm in the office every day, then I'm not traveling. for most staff- and other leaders are like like me- for most staff it's three days, uh, a week in, but we're still trying to figure out. we have not mandated which three days, and so some people come in and they say, well, I'm in, but nobody I work with is in, so I might as well be home. well, that's true, that's kind of silly, uh, or some. some departments work with other departments and the the one department is in on certain days and the department that they work with a lot are in different days. so it's this- frictions are on the margins that we're still trying to sort out. we adopted three days in about two years ago, much more aggressively than the other Reserve Banks. I think most of industry has moved in our Direction. uh, I'm not sure where it's ultimately going to settle out and I'm I'm with you that I don't want to do top down heavy hands. you must do it this way. but I'm also feeling like absent, that we're not going getting it quite right right now. yeah, but that's that self. the team has to self-govern. because the other, the only other comment I'd say to that again, to some people in the room. I always say to people on this topic: okay, forget about what you care about, what the boss wants or the Neil wants, okay, think about, even if you just think about- what's in it for yourself. I go back to like I learned the most in life now that you know, and I worked at IBM 40 years, so I've had a long career and I learned the most apprenticing other people, and it wasn't by appointment and it wasn't by zoom, and so you know, depending on the kind of profession you're in, I think you're always apprenticing and that only happens when you are Serendipity of being around certain situations and and I don't know how to engineer that on a schedule for you, right. so if you do it for no other reason, do it for yourself. come in at times, right, but every, every senior person- I believe that, 100% every senior person I know says that and somehow I don't feel like people believe us. yeah, well, that's cuz we're old. yeah, so fossils, exactly. uh, okay, let's jump around a little bit more. um, One Challenge in this region is we- this is a perennial challenge- can't find the skilled workers that we need for our companies, that we don't have the population growth that we need. uh, you Challen, you face this at IBM. what did you learn? how did you approach it? okay, this, this will border on a monologue for one second or a minute or two with you, because I feel so. Neil knows this is the topic he saw me talk on that I feel so strongly about and came to feel strongly about it for reasons that I think are super valid. um, so I I told you the story just a little bit about my mom, right, um, and what I witnessed with my mom. I got this really big lesson and it'll come into play. to answer his question, I watched when my mom went back to school and could get a job. she never did get a college degree, by the way. but I thought you know what? my mom's pretty smart, she's got a lot of aptitude, but she never had access to what I ended up having access to, right. so that, like I'm an engineer, so like equation, stay in my head that access and aptitude are not equal in this country, in most countries. I would learn in the world. so I'm going fast forward. then I'm CEO. it's 2012. now now Common Place. um, I need cyber people. um, we' got a big security business. we need thousands of them. you can't get them anywhere. and so I happen to Serendipity walk into a meeting on Corporate social responsibility and the guy say to me: hey, we got this one little high school somewhere and it's in Brooklyn, really poor neighborhood. they're high schoolers. we're going to help them with curriculum, we're going to give them some mentorships, internships. oh, we even said we might give them a job if we had an opening and I'm like it's a fine, sounds fine. oh, we're going to do it in cyber, fine too. I come back a little bit later I say how'd that go? they said, oh, my God, they're doing outstanding. and I'm like: you know, I need thousands of these people. I say, well, how many do we hire? I? I? I couldn't hear their voice. I said, what they're like? three, I'm like three and they're like. I said, okay, you told me they're doing a great job. why aren't you hiring these people? they said: because every job we have requires a college degree, I said, or PhD. I said, but they can do the job. I don't don't really understand and I said, well, okay, it would start to this in my mind. the second equation would be where you start should not determine where you end, just like where my mom and and where could have been for me. and I then started to ask questions and I so this, this would be a 10-year Journey for me, and I would say, okay, well, how many people in in this country don't have a college degree? I didn't know this number. you know it, of course. you know it because you're looking at Labor all the time. um, it's 65%. and then I'm like, okay, well, this must not be true in other developed countries. no, they're all about 65% do not have college degrees. we'll talk later, maybe about in George Floyd- and that 80% of black Americans don't have a college degree. I'm like, okay. then I said, well, how, okay, I knew 100% of my jobs required it and and I said: but let's start looking at. and I had a wonderful HR leader who said: well, let me start looking. if I wrote down what skill was needed, not the degree, agree, maybe this would look different. so we started relooking at all the job descriptions, which is a very tedious oh my God, it took five years. okay, but to make a long story short, in the end, instead of 100% requiring college degrees, 50% actually require them to get started, and those that one school would turn into about 350 around the world and about 200,000 kids coming through. but more was born out of it, this Paradigm which I now help companies around the world do- skills first, hire for skills over degrees and not just a degree- doesn't mean it's bad. not about two class citizens back to. we just have different starting points. and because I now have data- okay, because I have all these Engineers working for me, I had to prove, because they all accused me of dumbing down the workforce and all sorts of things. so this is one thing: when you're there a long time, you can, you know, you can like listen to stuff and come back at them and you're like: okay, just wait a minute, we get some more data and, as it turned out, 75% of those people all went in and got degrees first, phds, coming through. so this wasn't an issue of their aptitude, this was pure access. and oh, by the way, 90% were Black and Hispanic. so, in my view, this is like a new talent pool we all need, by the way, which you are completely overlooking, because God does spread aptitude pretty equally, and so not access, but aptitude, yes, and and so I became just a- well, you can tell it's my monologue- over this idea of skills first hire for degrees over just to hire for skills, not just a degree. and I really believe I've come to believe and again you'll heard me say this. I think this is fundamental if you believe in democracy, because right now, a lot of people in this country don't think they're going to have a better future and they don't think their kids are going to do better than them, and they can't get a good job and support, because I mean middle class jobs that support a family of four. when I say this, I'm not talking about low-end Labor, I'm not talking about an $18 housekeeping. I am on good paying jobs- $70,000, $100,000- and they're there, and, with AI coming to me this is the only way through it. and when people say, well, get every everybody at college degree, I was like we don't have time. you, even if you wanted to do it and had the money, you don't have time. I. and so this is the unrest will grow faster than people feeling they can contribute, you know, successfully to their families and Society. so again, sorry, you're probably going to leave after you think I'm going to make you sign a petition or something, but I mean, I'm just uh. I, if I could convince you if you hire people, if you would take the time to rewrite, and. and then we were just talking uh with one of the young ladies I met who's teaching on this. the biggest roadblock is: is your own teams right? because it is so imbred in us that a college degree is a ticket that they must know how to do certain things and how to hire. the bias is so strong. it takes a lot of cultural change and a lot of CEOs to lead to really stay with this topic, but if you do, it is so rewarding and it opens up it. so so I learned again with my all five years of data uh afterwards they were more retentive, more loyal, performed better after one year. performed better, okay, so I'm, I'm thinking in a, in in, in many cases less expensive because they're starting at a different level. I'm like, so what do I not like about this equation? and so now today, well, when I retired, 20% of IBM hiring in this country was non non-degreed people. I mean, so it takes time, but it was already 20 and we're we're a huge hirer, so, um, it had come through. so sorry, I, I, I, I could go give another hour on this topic, because I mean there's lots of things my to my ex congressmen and senators and all. I mean there's things in our policies that just have to change and with AI coming, we're all going to have to go back to school. like this, once and done is over. and so, you know, pel grants all these things that are made PA for a world where you go to school once or you don't get a certificate. or the use of community colleges- I, I should have mentioned community colleges were part of this formula. they're so overlooked and, as you know, other countries like Switzerland and Germany, way over, they use apprenticeships. in all, not everybody goes to universities, right, vocational schools have a role in life, so all right. so I'm, I'm want to do, I'm exhausted now, so I have to have take a break. you're not, you're not done yet, you're not done yet. so I'm going to come back to you with one followup to that which has a Minnesota connection, and then I want to get the audience ready for some Q&A with the audience. I do have some of those six-year High- they're six-year high schools, by the way- that were getting associate degrees in high school at the same time. they're here in Minnesota, so, and kids doing super duper, okay, well, maybe you can talk about that in this answer question. you launched 110, which Tim mentioned about, which is which is related to the topic we were just talking about. George Floyd was, of course, murdered here in Minneapolis. international news, uh, huge shock to to every- I think everybody- uh, just, can you talk about what 110 is and how, how it's going? yeah, and some- there are some of the big companies here that are members, but I want to talk about what it is. and then, what changed in the Zeitgeist here and in, like, what's happened now? um, so, in the wake of the murder of George Floyd- you know, businesses, everyone's outrage, systemic racism, and some people were doing a lot of talking. others were getting money and uh, two my colleagues who are my good friends- I've known them for different reasons a long time. Ken Chanel ran American Express and Ken Frasier ran a drug company called MC um, they're arguably the two most senior black Business Leaders in this country to to this day- and uh, I knew them both well and they said: no, we should do a business. forget all this talking and money. what businesses can do is give people jobs. so they had this great vision. as I always say, they're the Visionary, I am their plumber, and but they didn't know how to do it. I'm like, okay, if 80% of blacks do not have a college degree- and, as it turns out for all companies, 80% require college degree, as I would find we'd survey them all- okay, you can't give them jobs. I mean, this is just. I would always say to people, this is just math and so. but if you adopt skills first and really start reworking everything, there's a way. so we formed 110 to say: could we put a million people in middle class family sustaining jobs? um, we started at that time as saying: black Americans we really were targeting, because this is where the problem was most acute: 80% without college degrees and, uh, we would have to. then the first thing, we teach all the companies how to do skills first and work with them to change the culture and then to go find the PO. you got to get people skills. I mean, you can't, there can't be nothing. so you have to work with vocational Community College. you got to work on it. so that's how it was born, and I would. we are now up to about 200,000, but we're three years in um, so it's been harder than we thought. the bias is stronger than you would think, think and not maybe you wouldn't think. but, and the one really smart thing we did is we made it be a CEO- Le, you might say, because it's so cultural, the, the issues you're dealing with on the topic, and we knew it would take a long time and any initiative dies after one or two years if it doesn't have some really strong support at the top, and so we did that right. and then what happened with the on the heels of the Supreme Court, uh decision and some of the other things that have happened? I mean, you feel this intense backlash, to quote Dei, or you know, greenwashing an ESG, and I can see it in lots of companies and we see it and we've really had to talk to people about: be careful, what we are doing helps everyone. it, yes, we targeted this most acute group, like a startup would to get started, but the skills first idea is raises all boats and so that's what. so how we're doing now, I mean I, I, some companies, they don't care what people say. others are like, oh, I don't really want, I'm going to keep doing it, but I don't want to talk about it anymore. so it's interesting to watch because I I worry about this moment that again the pendulum swings. yet this idea of skills first for our country, all developed countries, is, I think, the right thing to keep moving on. and um, and it does lift all boats. and so we keep saying no, no, this is about another equation. you know, the best way to deal with any kind of systemic racism or inequality is Economic Opportunity and that's all we're trying to do and that helps anybody in that, yeah. or if you go back to IBM example, it's getting the talent did you need? I said yeah, I'm like this is I need the employees. what's wrong? right, yes, just decide your own reasons, but that's why, yeah. so let me look around. do we have the microphone's ready? yeah, please. so why don't we? I see some hands are up um, go ahead over there in the corner. please introduce yourself. uh, when you ask jinnie a question, we know each other already. I met him right. so my name is shashindra Hulker and I'm coming from University of Minnesota Carlson schools of management, and my question is: I'm: I'm really glad you brought that excess versus the aptitude. and then when we go more higher level, the soft skills are become more important and for the companies it's hard to distinguish. the softt skill is because they are intangible and also depends on the personal biases. so how we can create a system that will. so people with the soft skills are easier, easy to approach and distinguish. so do you have any experience or mechanism for that? yeah, the soft skills, yeah, yeah, so for this is you bring up a very good point, because when I talked about skills- first hiring- by the way, this is super good point- um, actually the soft skills are harder to develop than the quote hard skills, and this is what I also came to believe. most of us can teach people any of these hard skills they need to know, which is also why I quit hiring people for knowing exactly a X or Y and, by the way, if they'd only done X or Y for 30 years, they don't really want to do Z. okay, they only want to do one thing. in the rate of change of Technology, the skills are changing three to five years. so if I hire you for this, if I don't hire someone who loves to learn- and that is what we did to end up changing our hiring- we test for ability to learn and willingness to want to learn and curiosity. that's really what you want. and so, because, if you're that, I can handle all the rest as your employer, and so it would change, like I said, it would be the first thing we would start to then and you can test for people's willingness, propensity to learn and curiosity, and that's what I would hire, based on. number one to be first, and then the soft skills. people have this view that, oh, if you went to college, you must have good soft skills. good presenter, you're a good talker, you're good. it's not true, and so the facts I mean, as evidenced up here. so not always true. so that point, I think, is: um, the soft skills are the ones that you really want schools to to build more on for people coming out. so they've got some more of that. I can remember- this is a funny story- when, um, one of these first Schools- they're called PCH schools, sixe high schools, one of the first ones- President Obama came too, so he comes in, of course. since President Obama came, the governor came, the mayor came, you know, so you have Bloomberg, all of them there. so we in this little Library sit in these little chairs and, uh, he says, well, let's go to the computer lab. I'm like there's not one. he's like there's not a computer. I'm like that's actually not what we're teaching him first, believe it or not. they needed to learn things like how to work, how to do teamwork, uh, how to uh act in a meeting with other people. they needed to learn, you know, how to write things better. I'm like we got to go there first. if they can do that, then I can teach them the computer stuff later. right, and I can remember him being so shocked about that and but, and that speaks to what our schools need to teach as well, by the way. so so, and by the way, if you want to learn the soft skills, you're not going to learn it over Zoom. just back to the work from home comment: uh, other, see, I have a velvet hammer. on that topic he's more of a hammer. okay, yeah, I don't have time for [Laughter] velvet. yeah, uh, Thomas pulson. um, thanks president Kashkari for and the club for putting this uh lunch on and having this opportunity. I had a question really around um productivity and generative Ai, and so so one of the, I think, um questions that economists and business people struggle with is the impact of generative AI on productivity, and there's really, you know, productivity is kind of a weird concept that's misconstrued. there's demand generated productivity and there's supply side driven productivity, and a lot of people who' have been talking about generative AI is more around. hey, it's going to boost our productivity from a supply side, not a demand side perspective, but it has risk of of disrupting a large portion of the labor force. um and uh, you know the technology and how technology is delivered in the United States, a lot of that being peoples and what IBM did, Etc. so maybe you could kind of opine a little bit about how this all might work out such that we get constructive demand gen? uh productivity, gen demand generated productivity, um, from generative AI versus, you know the other way around. thanks, did you plant that question? I did not plant the question, but so, oh, this I'm so happy. okay, how many people know what generative AI is and how many of you love it? oh, that's interesting. like half the hands went down. okay, um, could you, why? why do you love it? drives, efficiencies- okay, anybody else want to shout out why, efficiencies? no, anybody else love it? for another reason: repetitive task. okay, yeah, that is true, I'm not good at a starting point. I could use momentum. my husband- we just did our. we did it's a long story because he almost died a year ago. he's okay now, but, um, he, uh, I, I- I'm only telling you this because we wouldn't have done this otherwise. we reset our vows, you know, after 44 years, I mean because otherwise we're not that sentimental and but and but we had to get this ceremony. so I used it because I'm like, how do you write a ceremony without, like, a minister? you know it's? hey, I got a good starting point right, um, did you know that? yeah, that was how we got that. oh, you wrote your own. no, I had to write his for me too. so, um, but. so first I want to share with you like my biggest lesson around AI, because back to I was doing AI when AI wasn't cool and I took a lot of arrows for this. so I'm like at the earliest of AI I really felt a decade ofoe could have gotten this going and I spent billions on this topic as well. so a lot of constructive learning, um. so first I'll tell you the story I learned and then I'm going to connect it to gener of AI. given who IBM's DNA is, it does tough stuff. it just just man on the moon. it's what we think of. maybe not, it shouldn't have been the right starting point, but so, as we went into AI, we did oncology. we said if anything we could do is help with picking both making a correct diagnosis and the right treatment for for I, me as you, those doctors in the room- vast numbers of cancers, Etc. in in all of the different clinical trials. and so we set out. so what did I learn from that brutal, brutal set of years and experiments? well, first I learned that actually, even a decade ago, the technology was better than the human doctor, except when decisions are really consequential to you, um, your tolerance for an error goes to about zero, as a as as a patient or a user. and so what I witnessed was, let's say, it was wrong 20% of the time, 15. they say this is horrible, 15, 20%. and I be, in my head, been thinking: how wrong do you think your real doctor is, or, in general, not your own, but everybody else's okay, and uh, it's like can be 30%. I mean, what if you're in India where there's one oncologist for 2,000 people? or okay, but I witness tolerance. then the next thing I watch with professionals, cuz, when you talked about all the careers, they'd be like: but how did this thing know? that's the answer, prove it. who trained it? i' say, well, this world leading Cancer Center trained it. that's just one world leading Cancer Center, not my world leading Cancer Center. oh, that's interesting. okay then how did it come up with that answer? okay, a professional. unless you can explain it, understand how it was trained, trained. and then the third thing I learned from the doctors was: let me tell you what I work 24/7 today. if I got to do more work to get this to happen, I'm not doing it. there's no time for it. oh, that means I have to re-engineer how work is done. and they said- and, by the way they didn't. I'm saying it much more crudely, to shorten it is: we live in a pay for service, World fee for service. we do not pay for outcomes, and so, just because I'm shortening this up, that's not an incentive enough. and so all these issues had, like nothing, nothing to do with the technology, and this is now. I wrap back to generative AI, which is a new form of AI, in in in. in its most simplest form, all it's doing is predicting the next word. this is how you can get such bad answers from it at times, and so it's. it's doesn't know what it's really doing. it's predicting the next word off of massive amounts of compute and connections. and so I say this: when you say what's going to happen, I personally don't believe it's going to impact all jobs. I I've witnessed this because you're forgetting the human element. I mean, a plane can fly itself and there are two still Pilots sitting there. we said: there be. you said this: self-driving cars would get rid of all. you know all the allegedly all the truck drivers are going to be doomed. how's that going so far? how's that going so that- and I don't mean to be cynical, my point is, this is going to be an issue of trust in this technology is to the rate and Pace it will move, and I also really believe that it's going to do parts of jobs. there will be some, like you said about robotic, I mean there, but this is with every technology: some big chunks will get replaced, um, but I'm more about this is my worry: it's going to impact a little bit of a lot of jobs and therefore you and I are going to all have to learn how to use it properly, and so the issue will be trust, which is why I'm kind of perturbed by how it got introduced. now I can say that, because I'm not the one that introduced it. um, because they just like let it out of the bag. that's not how I would have taken such a powerful technology. it would. the world wasn't ready. you know it took Netflix. I think it took Netflix- I'm going to be generally right- something like three years to get to a million people. you know, in geni got to a 100 million people in a month, right. so I mean it was just it was Unleashed and people didn't really know yet what to do with it and how to how to handle it properly. so trust will be the issue. I think the goal of it has to be to make you and I better, like the doctors, make us better, not replace us. and I think if all of you in a company doing it, if you haven't taken time to think about what the goal of it is, I don't know why. somebody said the goals to replace man doesn't have to be to replace man. I mean the goal can be to make us better and if it, if you approach it that way, which I watched when AI was done well in companies, it was to make the humans better and I saw a vastly different acceptance rate in it. I my best story was the unions in France in Banks who they really wanted. you know a financial services person? those of you guys in banking like, do these poor people know the answer to every one of those? well, this is why you send me like a thousand pages of disclosure at the end of every product I buy. I mean these poor people and so when you call and talk to a financial services person, they can't answer. so they viewed it as a way to not be wrong and to be able to. they want to do a good job. most people want to do a good job. so I think our hope is it will be a great equalizer, that many people could do a harder job than they could do without it, and then I think they could make more money. so I'm actually more on the side of like. I'm hopeful if we pay attention to this trust side and, unlike social media, we pay attention to the downsides of it. at the same time, like we knew, social media had bad, a bad underbelly, but we did nothing about that for a decade and so we know now this Genai has a bad underbelly to it. it can be a bad thing. it can be harnessed by bad people. it can be taught bad stuff. I mean it does it forget the hallucination? I mean it's going to take fraud. God help us through the election. what's going to happen right with? you've seen some of this already, so its future is uncertain right now, I think, given all these little Dynamics. but in the long Arc of things, I think that, um, it will make us. it has a chance to actually help us remove the stuff we don't like and let humans do what humans should do: the part of the job. if you do a job that like really could be done by a machine only, okay, then your job's exposed, right. but if your job requires some thinking and reasoning and judgment general of AI is horrible at judgment- like, don't ask it to pick which bank strategy is the best- horrible at judgment so I. this is why, you know, I feel like, as we learn more about it, I don't even remember what your question was actually at this point. so it, um, my gen I speech right know trust man Steed, the good and the bad of the thing, and you know all of us are going to have to go back to school. okay, we have time for one more question, last one, uh, after that, no one probably want to ask there a lot of hands went out. thank you very much, very rich. um, going back to the AI thing, I mean, if all of us are nodes on this giant Network called artificial intelligence, AI, generative, whatever it may be, is some good being built into this system? will values based decision making, to your point, actually be one of the rules that develops this technology to help make life and depth decisions or maybe even modify interest rates favorably for some of us? thank you for some of you. look, this is a great question to end on, because I think, um, this is in, this is in our hands, the answer to this. and so, again, for some of there have been a lot. I did a lot of work on regulation of Technologies and I'm a strong believer that technology should be regulated. but in a certain way, uh, because I participated. I was talking to you, um, about Rob Portman, the senator from Ohio, and uh, I remember Rob called me one day and he said: I'm trying to get the big search engines to agree on that they should be held liable if they host child pornography. he said: what do you think would you sign up to this if you and I have a hosting business? and all he said I'm not social media, but I have a hosting business. and he says: if you were hosting child pornography, should you be held liable for it if you knowingly had it? I said yes. you said knowingly, I, so I know it's there. I'm like, yeah, I'm like, is there a trick in this? is this is a pretty straightforward question to me? he said, yeah, you'd think it would be a straightforward question. I'm like I don't even have to ask a lawyer. and um, but at the time, the social media companies all said no. because they said: no, no, we're just a dumb pipe, don't know what's sitting here. they do know what's sitting there, okay. so I come back to when you say: will it be used for good? so here's like three simple things I think we should do to legislate it, and- and I do believe the Biden Administration has helped- there's a lot of groups that have tried to say this. um, one is: don't Reg? ulate the technology, but regulate its use. so now it says: okay, if I'm going to use it to pick a movie, who really cares? if that's wrong, if I'm going to use it to pick my cancer diagn, you know treatment- different question. my financial decisions- different questions. so the higher risk it's used for it should be regulated. now, what? how does? to me, the easiest way to regulate it honestly, you- you can't believe it from a business person- is, I think there should be liability. if there's liability, you'll be surprised how fast people will self-govern themselves. it' be really quick, because I even said: now you know every there's like these sayings of every earnings call that're counting how many times they're saying generative AI. as soon as you announce liability, they' be like: that's not generative AI, that is just data analytics. okay, and so I, I really believe that it. and so for those use cases, just like a bank today, any money laundering I mean all sorts of- we get held liable if we are doing these things. we got to compliance, we got to audit ourselves, we got to do do this stuff. um, I sit on the board of JP Morgan. I mean I understand this very well. so I think if there's aot second thing, so regulate its use, not the technology. second point would be then: hold people liable for misuse in high-risk cases. and then the third thing I would do is be just be sure to keep the technology open, which to some of you that may mean nothing, but to others, you know, the big guys who own it right now would like nothing more than the government to say: register your algorithms with us for compliance. they'd be like: yes, please do that, because we're the only ones who have the manpower to do it, and that means us three can do it, and everybody else, every small business in the country, won't get a chance. so by keeping it as open technology, then I think you have this flourishing ecosystem all around it that you don't let people own. just three big answers to something right. so that would be what I would do if I was king or queen for a day. um on this topic, wonderful, Jenny. thank you so much. this was absolutely wonderful. I'm going turn it back over, Tim Tim. hopefully that.