https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/neel-kashkari-qa-at-greater-mankato-growth-event

Neel Kashkari Q&A at Greater Mankato Growth event

February 6, 2024

Greater Mankato Growth

Neel Kashkari

well, good afternoon everyone. uh. I'm Dean zimmerly. I'm the managing partner of gizon and Hunter uh the presenting sponsor for uh this luncheon with President Neil kashari. gizon Hunter is a team of 24 lawyers across two offices in New Alm and Mano, Minnesota, who have, in my view, through their uh determined work on behalf of clients, have really solidified ourselves as a premier law firm in southern Minnesota and the greater uh upper Midwest region. we provide a full range of Legal Services on behalf of our clients uh including estate planning, family law, employment, real estate, environmental and many more, and we work in industries that are uh, I think, well represented in the man region, including uh lending and finance, especially Agra, business, construction, Transportation. we're incredibly proud to be the presenting sponsor for this luncheon today, for the same reason that we're incredibly proud to be part of the Mano Community. for over 85 years, gon has grown with the communities of new Al and Mano um, and right now is a really exciting time uh. you heard that from Ryan today. you know, time and again, Mano is highlighted as having just uh you know, some of the strongest economic numbers uh in the country as far as Unemployment uh and economic growth, and I think that really speaks to the vibrancy of the econom strength in this area and it's been great to partner with, uh, some of the organizations that help facilitate that in this area, including green stee, including Grant greater manal growth. we see that vibrancy of the economy in our clients and really when our clients succeed, that's when we seed, so we want to be partner in that success. so we're really excited to hear M Mr Cash car's remarks about the economic Su success and challenges in the area, uh, and to be able to kind of share that with the Business Leaders and share that insight and knowledge here and so, with that, it's my pleasure to introduce our moderator and keynote speaker today. first moderating is Andy wilky, the president- uh, the Executive Vice President, excuse me- of Greater Mano growth, and our keynote speaker today is Mr Neil cashcari. so, before he makes his way to the stage, I just want to share a little about him. uh, president, Neil kashari has been the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis since January 1 2016. he serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, bringing the ninth Federal Reserve District's perspective to monetary policy discussions in Washington DC. in addition, Neil oversees Minneapolis fed operations and leaves its many initiatives. he was instrumental in establishing the opportunity and inclusive growth Institute, whose mission is to Ure that world class research helps to improve the economic well-being of all Americans. most recently, he supported the expansion of the center for Indian Country development, which advances the prosperity of native nations and Indigenous communities through actionable data and research. Neil earned his bachelor's and master's degree in mechanical engineering from the University of ill, Illinois. he became an aerospace engineer uh, developing technology for NASA missions. eventually, turning to finance and public policy, he earned as MBA from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, joined Goldman Sachs and served in other in several senior positions at the US Department of Treasury, including overseeing the troubled asset relief program, or known as tarp uh, during the financial crisis. before joining the Minneapolis fed, he spent four years at Pimco and then, in 2014, ran for governor of California on a platform focused on Economic Opportunity. uh. now he lives in Oro, Minnesota, with his wife, Christine, children in Ali in tumsa and their New Foundland dog Webster. so please join me in welcoming Mr Neil kashari. uh, thank you, Dean. I very much appreciate that and I'm really glad that my introduction was significantly shorter than president kar's. um, but I'm so glad to have everybody here today. how about this view of of Mano, greater Mano? this is an amazing space. I'm so glad to have you here and it's it's great that there's just not a lot of snow either, which has been great for the travel here as well. so I'm so glad to be here. thank you for gson, Pioneer Bank and Great River Energy and our friends at ABDO for helping support uh conversations and events like this. um, I'm going to sort of kick things off a little bit and have uh Neil kesari speak a little bit about whatever he decides to speak about, and then I'm hoping for a lot of questions from you all. I do have a series of questions, but I'm really hoping that we can hear more from you all and ask questions of uh president casari this afternoon. so, with that, I'll kick it off to you, sir, all right? well, thank you. thank you for having me. it's great to be with all of you really appreciate the great turnout. uh, it's a great opportunity for us. I always like to start by explaining why I'm here, why do I do meetings like this and why are these meetings so important to us. in 1913, a long time ago, Congress created the Federal Reserve System, which is our nation Central Bank. but they did something unique. they wanted all of the different regions of our country to be represented in the monetary policy process. so they created the Board of Governors in Washington DC. I just got quieter. can you still hear me, okay? um, they created the Board of Governors in Washington DC and they created 12 independent federal reserve banks scattered around the country, the ninth of which is here, the Minneapolis Fed. so the jobs, my job and my colleagues are to get out across our region, which includes Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, the Upper Peninsula, Michigan and Northwestern Wisconsin, and to really have a sense of what's happening on the ground in our economy. and then I go back to Washington DC every 6 weeks for Federal Open Market Committee meetings, fomc meetings that are in the news. a lot and part of what I'm doing in those meetings is talking about what's happening here in our regional economy. now we cannot set a different monetary policy for Minnesota and for California. we all use the same dollar, so it's the same monetary policy for the country. but I want to make sure that our region is represented in that deliberative process so we can make the right call for the nation as a whole. SO meetings like this are great for me because it gives me a chance to hear directly from businesses, from workers, from labor leaders, from Civic leaders, about what's happening here on the ground, and then this helps us make sense a lot. you know we look at a lot of data. I have a team of brilliant PhD economists that help me sort through the data every day, and a lot of times the data is sending us mixed signals. it's conversations like this that help us make sense of those mixed signals, to try to get a sense of where the underlying economy is going. now let me just spend a couple minutes on what we're trying to achieve and then I'm going to turn it over and we're going to have some- uh- a discussion. Congress has given us what we call our dual mandate, two goals that we're trying to achieve. one goal is stable prices, what we've defined as 2% inflation. uh, it won't be a surprise to you to know that we have not been hitting our 2% inflation Target. over the past few years. we've had very high inflation. the other goal is maximum employment: as many Americans as possible gainfully employed and contributing to our economy. now, the way we thought it worked was that there was a trade-off between these two goals that if the economy got really hot and businesses had to compete to find workers and you couldn't find workers, you had to increase wages, the unemployment rate would go down and the businesses would have to pass those costs onto their customers and that would lead to high inflation. so the labor market would get hot and you'd have high inflation and then in that situation we would raise interest rates to try to tap the brakes on the economy to bring those two things into balance. when inflation took off over the last few years, my colleagues and I rais interest rates very aggressively and you, if you bought a house or you've thought about buying a house, you probably saw that mortgage rates went from around 3% for a 30-year mortgage to around 8% for a 30-year mortgage morgage. so we raised. that was because of us. right, just full, full disclosure. we raised interest rates aggressively to try to tap the braks on the economy to bring the high inflation down. we wanted to do that while hoping that we could keep the labor market strong, but history has shown that that's really hard to do. usually, when the Federal Reserve raises interest rates to try to tap the brakes on the economy, you push inflation down, but you end up pushing unemployment up. well remarkable thing has happened over the last 6 to n months. inflation has come down very quickly. it's been very good news. we're not all the way there yet, but we've made a lot of progress on inflation. but, very happily, the labor market has been strong. the national unemployment rate is still 3.7%. we had a very strong jobs number last Friday nationally, uh, and so it's kind of a conundrum: how's inflation been able to fall so quickly and the labor market has been so strong? I mean, it's a it's a high class problem. don't get me wrong. we want to keep the labor market strong, but it just adds to the number of mysteries that we're trying to figure out in this reopening of the economy following the pandemic. and so I'm going to be very candid with you about the things that we think we know and the things that we know we don't know, or the things that we're learning that we don't know. and conversations like this help me to try to make sense of what might be going on, and I have some theories for what I think is going on which we can get into, but I wanted to give that backdrop just to start the conversation going and so if you have your food in front of you, I encourage you to keep eating, uh, before it gets cold and but nonetheless, we're going to have our conversation. so thank you for being here. thank you for that, um. one thing I did want to note is we- we heard the, the names of your children, and I understand you're a a big American history fan. so Uli and tumpa- yeah, is that ulyses, ulys as, and tumpa and tumpa Sherman, the two leading generals who won the Civil War, uh, and saved the country I'm to. I want to name my kids after somebody I admire greatly and um. you know, I said to my wife when we were expecting our firstborn. I said boy, I wish we were having a boy because then we could name him Ulisses. and my wife is, uh, from the Philippines. she's a US citizen now, but she said ulyses. that's an unusual name. I kind of like that name for a girl. I said done, all right, so we've shortened it. I mean she goes by ulie, but it's short for ulses and uh, my son, tumsa, for Tuma Sherman. um, in any case, I hope when they get older they learn to appreciate the names as much as I do. we'll see. well, your wife is a good sport on that for sure. I love it. um. so I have one question just to kind of get the ball rolling, but then I do want to point out we have Liz sharp in the back wave. she'll have a microphone and then Tanner will have a microphone as well. so if you have a question, uh, after this one, throw your hand up and I will call on you and then Liz or Shannon, Liz or Tanner will will find you. so, um, earlier today, we had a conversation with some small business owners and, um, we talked about here in Mano. we think we're special and I think that we have a really, uh, fantastic growing economy, very diverse economy. um, the job market in Mano has been very robust- uh, leading the state in year-over-year job growth in 2023. yet employers seem to be still be struggling to find workers at all levels. is this the new normal and how will it impact the economic growth for our region and the nation as a whole? well, there's a there's a short run and there's a long run issue. in the short run issue, I don't want to suggest that recessions are never going to happen again. I hope we don't have a recession this year. right now it looks pretty promising that we're hopefully going to avoid one, but you never know, and there could be some disruption around the world. there's a lot of geopolitical turmoil going on right now. commodity markets could get upended. that could be big enough potentially to tip the world economy, or at least the US economy, in recession. that's not my base case. so if we had a recession triggered by one of these what we call shocks, then you would typically expect the job market to soften because a lot of employers would face downturns and have to lay people off longer term. we have a structural issue, especially in this part of the country, that we just don't have enough folks, young people. we're not having children as PRI as fast as prior Generations did or as many children as prior Generations did, and a lot of our young people are choosing to get up and leave. I heard that this morning in mano. a lot of young people come here for college, but a majority of those then go either elsewhere in the state or they leave the state altogether, and so it's a CH challenge for smaller cities and especially for Rural communities all across Minnesota who are trying to retain the young people that they do have growing up there, and so, if you look nationally, this is a big Challenge and this is why, ultimately, getting our immigration system right- and it's a political challenge, but getting that right- is important to meet the needs of our economy. if you look throughout American history, immigration has been a big source of Labor throughout American history. almost every Advanced economy in the world is struggling withow low birth rates as PE. as societies get wealthier, they tend to have fewer children, like Japan has been facing this now for decades. most many of those countries are culturally deeply resistant to immigration, so they don't even have immigration as an option. we have the benefit that we're not perfect at it, but we're pretty darn good at it and it's at least an option because a lot of people want to come to America. and so this is a much bigger political question. the long term it's really about: can we get an immigration system right that feeds, meets the needs of our economy, and that's both folks to work on farms, folks to work in meat packing plants, it's Hightech workers, its Engineers, it's nurses, it's kind of across the across the Spectrum. but that's a political challenge ultimately that the American people have to decide. very good, who's got a question? come on, friend. I know all of you so I know there's some folks here that have questions. I'm never opposed to cold calling people. I will. I know I'll call them some of you. there might just be some teachers in the audience too that know what that's like. so who's got a question? Tom, why don't you wait for Tanner to bring you a microphone so it gets caught on the live stream? good afternoon, Tom Lambert. I'm with Great River Energy utility company here in Minnesota. um, wondering if we've been hearing a lot about the IRA funding and the and the infrastructure funding and a lot of uh investment at the Fed level and and certainly even some at the state level to incentivize and and shape technology and and find energy sector relief for decarbonizing. do you have a take on on the impact of those, those Investments, those Federal Investments, and what they might do to the, the traditional kind of economic models of of Industry? you know? um, it's a good question. I don't. the short answer is: I don't know. um setting aside uh some of the Investments in alternative energy for a moment. one thing that we talked about this morning is the federal government and the state have allocated a lot of money for Broadband all across the country because there are lots of dark spots where people don't have access to broadband. and if we really can get the whole state of Minnesota wired for broadband and affordable, that could be a game, Cher, in helping smaller communities. uh, you know, people could stay there, work at a job- remotely, potentially, and have the amenities that they like in the small town that they grew up in. so I'm I'm optimistic, especially about broadband potential in many communities across our state and across the country. in terms of what the IRA and the chips act and other things means for the future of our economy, I think it's hard to know. um, there's a a lot of businesses that I talked to woke up during the pandemic to realize that their supply chains were much more vulnerable than they appreciated them. so many businesses are trying to build in resilience into those Supply chains. I don't think that necessarily means they're going to bring back manufacturing from China to the US. my guess is, for most businesses it means they're going to diversify their manufacturing sources so that it's not all China. maybe it's some in Mexico, some in Taiwan, Etc, Vietnam and some back here at home. so I don't know long term, uh, if it's going to have a huge effect or not. I know people who study climate economics say it's a very big deal to jump start the investments in solar and wind and that could make a meaningful imprint on our greenhouse gas emissions over time, but what that means for our economic growth potential I'm not sure. thanks for asking the first question. thank you, Tom Randy Berkland in the back, the greater man Cal growth volunteer of the year as well in 2024. thank you, sir. so my question is: I heard you say that we needed to get the immigration policy correct, not from a political point of view, but from an economic point of view. does your board have an idea what that looks like or do you have an personal idea what that looks like? yeah, I mean this. this is, um, I have you know, Neil's, if, if, if you, I have one vote in any kind of an election, so do you? so this is how I would do it. um, first of all, let me back up. where does economic growth come from? it comes from two things. it comes from productivity development, so we invent new technologies so we can do more with the same resources- we're very good at that as a country. and it comes from population growth: more people to produce things, more consumers to buy things- and I'm talking about the second half of that equation. and so if we have fewer kids, if we're all having fewer kids than prior Generations, all else being equal we're going to have slower economic growth. so this is just math and um. so for me, I would design the immigration system to say where are the jobs needed in our economy, and let's map who we prioritize coming in to meet those needs. that's how I would do it. but this is a- this is a, you know, very fraught political issue and, um, it seems common sensical for me from an economic perspective. but other people look at things from a cultural perspective or a philosophical perspective, and those opinions count too, and that's why it's been so hard for us as a country to reconcile and come up with a comprehensive plan. but it's funny, I I meet with all of our federal elected representatives from our region at least once a year. I try to meet with everybody, and Republican or Democrat, it doesn't matter, they all understand this, like they all get this. they hear from their constituents how important uh, the worker shortages facing their local economies, and so I say to them: you know the folks I talked to on the other side of the aisle I say the same thing: why can't you all get together and figure it out? and uh, you know it's tough. Anna, Phil, hi, I'm Anna with Excel Energy. two questions for you. one, not to get political, but I'm just kind of curious if you and your colleagues, when you get together, build out scenario based on we have an election coming up with a, maybe a new president, maybe not, but do you build out scenarios and what happens if there's a swing there and you don't have to tell me what those are. and the second one being, without scaring the crap out of us, what keeps you up at night? probably the election. the first one's easy to answer: we do not. we do not think about politics. we do not think about the upcoming election and different scenarios and what it could mean for the economy or what it means for interest rates, the, the. the deal is that Congress has, you know, they, they've said to us: we were created by Congress. they said we're going to leave monetary policy to you, but you have to stay out of politics. and we say, okay, got it, we agree with that. and so you know if we tried to, uh, think through those scenarios or try to do the opposite, because someone thinks we're going to Think Through the scenarios, then we'd be doing something less than optimal for the economy and so all we can do- it's hard enough, by the way, it's hard enough to get the economics right, given all the uncertainty of what we're facing. to now say we're going to throw politics into it, it would be an almost impossible task. so no, we don't, and I would tell you. you know we have these meetings, these fomc meetings, every six weeks. they're recorded, so every five years, with a fiveyear delay, the transcript comes out. I think the vast majority of Americans would be really proud if you could peer into those rooms, because you can't tell, based on the arguments people are making, what their own individual political perspective might be. you know, I went from being- I was appointed in 2016, President Obama was President when I was appointed- and then president Trump, of course, and now President Biden. I went from being one of the most doish members- meaning I was arguing for low interest rates my first four or five years on the committee- to now being, I think, on the more hawkish side. why? because the the economic data has changed and so you'll see people in the committee room switch positions, but the data has changed and so, um, that's, that's how it's supposed to work, and so we all take that very seriously and do our very best to check any politics at the door. when we come up with our Assessments. in terms of what keeps me up at night, it's always a thing that you can't think of and it's like, um, you know, shock. economists use this term. it's called a shock. it's this thing that hits the economy, that leads to a big disruption, and it's always the shock that you're not paying attention to. and, as you know, we have a team of people- people really smart economists- in Washington whose entire job it is to look for financial stability risks. and yet we still get surprised, even though our eyes are open. we're looking, we're trying to run through scenarios, and we were surprised when a bank as small as Silicon Valley Bank could run in. not that nobody believes Silicon Valley Bank or a bank of hundred billion dollars could run into trouble, but we were shocked that aund billion do Bank could lead to potential contagion all across the the banking industry in the country, forcing the Federal Reserve over a weekend to announce emergency measures to try to stabilize the banking system, and so it is always those things that we're trying to look for and that we know we're not seeing, because, by definition, we're not seeing it very good. I do have a question I wanted to ask, so um, related to um interest rates. back in November, there was an article in the Wall Street Journal and you shared, that under tightening will not get us back to a 2% in a reasonable time, and you were concerned about inflation tiing up again. do you feel the same way today? uh, how, if at all, have circumstances changed? well, the last 3 to six months, the inflation data has been surprisingly positive, meaning good news. so we have a 2% inflation Target and, if you look, so 2% inflation Target year-over-year. so you measure inflation Now versus a year ago. we want to get to 2% and we're not quite there yet on the year-over-year basis, but the six month data is basically there and the three-month data is basically there. so if you said, hey, if we just think we're going to continue what we've been experiencing, we're on track to get back down to our 2% Target. so the last three to six months has been surprisingly good news. uh, again, I don't want to say we're done yet. I don't want to say we're necessarily going to just Glide past all the way to 2%, but, fingers crossed, uh, the data is looking, uh, positive, very good. who else has a question? Liz, you're pointing to somebody. hello, here we go. thanks for coming. can you talk a little bit about the growth of the money supply over the last couple years and how that's played into inflation? yeah, you know, the money supply, um, this is a debate we have with our economists all the time. our chief Economist is sitting right over there and he's smiling, um, because I get asked this question a lot and you kind of intuitively think: well, if there's more money, that's what leads to inflation. the and historically, the Federal Reserve would look at the money supply very, very carefully as a way of trying to understand and where is inflation going. it's gotten complicated where the definition of what counts as money uh has actually with technology, with Mobile accounts, that you could move money between accounts very quickly. uh, the definitions have gotten a little bit fuzzier. so we know, over the very long term, the money supply has a critical role to play in setting inflation, but we also know that over the short run, the money supply does a lousy job of explaining the inflation that we're seeing. so, instead of focusing on the money supply right now, we're very focused on- at least I'm very focused on- what's actually happening to inflation and what's happening to the key components of inflation. so we look at Goods inflation, we look at housing inflation, we look at Services inflation, to try to understand: are we, how far back are we and how much further do we have to go? uh, related to that. um, you've been fairly outspoken, uh skeptic about cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin. can you explain your concern? yeah, I so. I travel around and I do talks like this. I do a lot in universities and, inevitably, in the University context. there are a number of students who want to ask me about Bitcoin and I always ask them: has anybody in this room ever bought something with Bitcoin- not bought Bitcoin, bought something using Bitcoin as a currency? I mean a sandwich, a computer, a book, anything. anybody ever bought anything using Bitcoin as a currency? no, I've never met somebody who's bought something using Bitcoin as a currency. so I always ask: what problem is this trying to solve? well, first I heard: well, it's an inflation hedge. well then, when we had this big inflation Spike, I said, darn it, we're going to make these Bitcoin guys feel like they were right. but then it turned out inflation or Bitcoin was a terrible inflation hedge. when we raise interest rates, Bitcoin got crushed. it's just another risky asset. so if you want to spend your money buying beanie babies or Pez dispensers or Bitcoin, knock yourself out okay. but it's now been 10 plus years and nobody has been able to articulate any actual utility in the real world other than an article of speculation. I'm not opposed to Beanie Babies. I'm not opposed to Pez dispensers. I am opposed to Americans taking their hard-earned money and being duped into investing in something and not realizing they're buying a beanie baby, thinking they're buying something else. I'll give you one little example. I've used this before. um, I said my wife is in the Philippines. one time we went to visit her family in the Philippines. we landed at Customs at LAX. I was going through customs. I was tired. the Customs officer said: what do you do for a living? and I said I work at the Federal Reserve. and he said: oh, do you know about Bitcoin? and I said I know something. and he said: my good buddy just took out a home equity loan to buy Bitcoin. should I do that? and I said: you know I'm not supposed to give investment advice, but do not do that, that, unless you want to risk losing your home. so that's what. that's why I'm concerned about it. uh, I have a lot of Beanie Bo babies at my house and they've come in really handy with my kids because they love them now too. so but once they're through with them, I'm in the market to get rid of them. so anybody wants them. so other questions? yes, sir, I have a question about the inverted yield curve. so I know, for the past two years there's been kind of What's called the inverted yield curve, which means that long-term interest rates are, I believe, lower than the short-term weights, which has historically been a mark of recession or economic recession. it's been in this way the past several quarters: um and um I. I just wanted to see if you had any commentary on that. is that still being viewed as a traditional Mark of recession or what are your comments on the inverted deal curve? yeah, so the gentleman is asking about, if you look at the US, government borrows money from the public, and sometimes they borrow money on a very short basis, for a few months, and sometimes they borrow money for 10 years or 20 years or Beyond, and traditionally, if you're going to loan your money to the government, you want a higher return if they're going to lock your money up longer. so the the interest rates go up over time that they borrow from. the yield curve is inverted, which means interest rates for the US government to borrow are very high right now and they're lower in the future, and that, in the past, has been a indicator that a recession is likely going to come. and you're right. the Y curve has been inverted now for quite a while and yet the recession- knock on wood- has not come. so what's going on? this goes to why in? in my view, this partially goes to why- inflation has come down so quickly. I think what's happening is, instead of the Federal Reserve having raised interest rates so much that we're pressing both feet on our brakes to slow down the economy, what I think is happening is we are pressing our feet on the brakes, but there's been a surge of Supply into our economy. so what causes inflation to go up? if there's more demand for goods and services, then there is Supply. prices go up, while over the past past year or so, Supply chains have mostly healed from the pandemic. the services economy has reopened and a lot of workers have come off the sidelines, enabling our economy to produce a lot more goods and services. so my gut tells me that most of the gains that we've had, the disinflationary gains, have been because the supply side of the economy has healed so quickly, and then it turns out in that context we're not actually slamming our feet on the brakes as hard as we thought. so, uh, you know we'll see we're not all the way back yet, but that that's my explanation for why inflation has fallen so quickly and why I think the yield curve, at least in this current episode, is not as reliable an indicator as it was in Prior Cycles, because in Prior Cycles the disinflation was really caused by the FED as opposed to a big surge of supply. thank you, Sam Zigler, with green seam, hopefully. hey, Sam Ziggler, Green Team. uh, thanks for coming. um, one question I have for you is the value of the dollar. so we're a region that does export a lot of goods and, um, we've had a global competitiveness for a number of years because our economy has been doing well and the value of the dollar has been strong. what do you see in the value of the dollar coming forward near future. you know, uh, first of all it's the. the treasury secretary is the one who's supposed to speak on behalf of the government as it relates to the currency. we don't Target the dollar, that's not an objective of ours. but, generally speaking, currencies get set in the short run by the relative stance of monetary policies. so the US has been relatively more aggressive, the Federal Reserve, in raising interest rates to bring inflation down and generally that has led to the dollar appreciating relative to the euro, relative to the Yen and Asian currencies. long term, The, the Reserve currency status, the, uh, the premium of the dollar is really set by economic competitiveness, which is where, which, which major economy do investors around the world, world, have the most confidence in, and that's driven by rule of law. that's driven by, uh, The Innovation sector. that's driven by fundamentals of economic growth. and America has so much going for us that I feel really optimistic about the Dollar's role in the world, just because our economic fundamentals, they're not perfect, we have challenges, but I wouldn't trade places with any other major economy in the world. and so short run it really is set by monetary policy, but the long run it's set by, it's set by these more fundamental economic competitiveness factors. yes, sir Tom Cook, and greetings from a fellow University of Illinois graduate. so it's nice. thanks for coming out. I enjoy your comments. I have a general question and I realized we have a target of inflation of 2%. why two, why not one? why not one and a half? why not quarter? I realize, deinla, you know deflation is a bad thing, but would you comment on that please? well, so I'm glad you said that. so, first of all, people usually say: why isn't it zero? and that's that's a reasonable question. why isn't it zero? and the my answer to that is: because deflation is a Bad Thing. here's why you: you go out, you get a loan, you buy a house and if your home price is falling, your Equity is getting wiped out and your mortgage, which is fixed, is getting bigger and bigger and bigger relative to the size of your house. so we need to avoid deflation. for the five or eight years before the pandemic, we were coming in below our inflation Target. we were at about 1.5% instead of 2%. so if we had had zero as our Target and we came in short, we would have been in deflationary territory. so 2% is the number that is basically low, but above zero to give us a little margin for error, and this is what most advanced central banks around the world have kind of coalesced around. there's no magic to it. it could be one and a half, it could be two and a half, but it's just a, just a simple number that people can get in their heads. bottom line is: we want to get back to inflation that you never think about. when we had 1.5 or 2% inflation before the pandemic mic, the American people didn't think about inflation. that's where we want to get back to. hey, Josh Matson, Josh Madson, how you doing? thank you for your time. I have a question: what role do you feel that cbdcs will play moving forward? I know you're not a fan of Bitcoin, but certainly things seem to be moving more digitally. so I'm curious what you, what your thoughts, are on that topic. and yeah, so the gentleman is asking about what he said. is cbdc Central Bank digital currency? imagine that the Federal Reserve issued its own version of Bitcoin and- and to be honest with you, the Federal Reserve is examining this because some central banks have said they want to study it and the Chinese Central Bank has said that they want to issue their own Chinese digital currency. I go back to the same question that I asked about Bitcoin. what problem is it solving? so, right now, digital currencies exist. today, I can send anybody in this room $5 via venmo or PayPal. right, that's a digital currency. uh, sorry, but I could. I could. that's a digital currency and you'd have it instantly in your account. you know it was there. so what is it that a central bank digital currency could do that venmo or PayPal can't do? and nobody can answer that question. and they say: well, maybe it's better for financial inclusion. there's no evidence that it is. maybe it's better to lower crossborder remittance transactions. there's no evidence that that's true. it's like maybe these magic beans will grow a giant beant stock. it's possible. I can't prove to you that they won't grow a giant bean stock, but I can tell you there's no evidence that they will grow a giant bean stock. so I am right now, deeply skeptical because all of the people who've been excitedly talking about it, no one has been able to articulate the actual problem that it is actually solving in the real world. last thing I'll say: but what about China? why is China doing it? you know what you could do with the Central Bank digital currency. that you can't do with venmo. the government could monitor every one of your transactions. can't do that with venmo. sounds pretty good to the Chinese government. you could directly tax your accounts. can't do that with venmo. sounds pretty good to the Chinese government and you could impose negative interest rates on your account. you can't do that with enmo. you could do that in theory with the cbdc. no, if the Federal Reserve wants to do any of those things, okay, and so I mean I'm going to leave my mind open, but so far I'm deeply skeptical because nobody has been able to articulate an actual use case that I think makes any sense for the American people. others, Pam, dears with the wild Zone. I just want to make a comment that we have a lot of banks here, and during the pandemic, if we hadn't had our Community Banks, it would have been really tough for us in business. so I just want to say thank you to the Community Banks because they are what got us through. my question is: are you protecting these Community Banks? because that is a fear I have if the Community Banks go away. so, uh, thanks for your comment. uh, I've heard your comment. uh, I mean it's very genuine comment. over and over and over again from communities all across our region. I mean the number of businesses who told me, told my colleagues, that they had had long-standing customer relationships with giant National Banks and then, when Co hit and Congress rolled out the PPP money, they couldn't get their Bank to pick up the phone and they had to go down the street to the local Community Bank and open a new account. but that local Community Bank was able to help them apply for the PPP and get the funding. uh, I've heard that over and over and over again, so I believe your comment. I know, I know you're right about that. it is remarkable how Community Banks were able to step up. so Community Banks are under lot of pressure and Regulators are trying to level the playing field, within the bounds of what we can do, between the big giant Banks and the small Banks. but there are a number of structural challenges that Community Banks face. one is- I talked about, uh, digital transactions- like banking is becoming more technology heavy every year and that technolog is expensive and it's easier for a bigger Bank to be able to afford the latest it platform so you can have the mobile app that you want with the seamless interface. it is harder for small Banks to be able to offer the latest technology and I I imagine those pressures are only going to continue to increase over time. uh, second issue is we saw when Silicon Valley Bank blew up that people were nervous about their money, nervous about whether or not the government was going to protect their accounts if their accounts were above the FDIC limit, and a lot of money started flowing into the big giant Banks because people assumed that those Banks were too big to fail. that's a huge challenge. uh, there's a proposal out right now that the Federal Reserve and other Regulators have to try to raise Capital requirements on the biggest banks and level the planing field. but it it continues to be a big regulatory challenge. uh, you know, nobody is trying to layer more regulations on Community Banks. they're trying to level set things to try to level the playing field. but it is a real challenge if customers believe that the giant banks are going to be protected and the small and midsize Banks may not be. um, you know, i' the Minneapolis fed and I have spoken out about this issue very loudly for the past eight years. most of our calls have fallen on deaf ears, to be honest with you, and so it's something we're going to continue to look at and work on, but it's a real challenge for our community Banks, others, otherwise, I've got to ask my questions and they're not near as interesting as yours. okay, um, I'm going to ask- maybe switch gears a little bit- talk about your, your American history, uh background and uh appreciation. who is the most underappreciated character in American history? well, I'm biased, um, because you know I named my daughter after him, but ulyses, as Grant uh is a remarkable- I mean, people have heard of Grant's Tomb, right the joke when you're growing up. who's buried in Grant's Tomb? other than that most people don't know anything about Grant uh, remarkable, remarkable man who basically had failed in every aspect of his life, uh, as a businessman, um, he had a problem with alcoholism, but then, when the Civil War broke out, he volunteered to go and try to lead men and turned out, boy, he could lead men in battle uh, and ultimately Lincoln found him and turned to him uh, and he was eventually in charge of the whole Union armies- I mean a million plus uh men. and so remarkable, remarkable figure who led the fight to win uh, to defeat the Confederates, keep the Union uh, United uh, and end slavery, and then he obviously went on to become president as well. so if you ever interest learning about a figure from history, I fell into grant and I just couldn't believe, uh, how this guy was largely overlooked in modern American history. we do have a question back there, Alec feffer. president kashari, thanks for joining us. uh, my question to you is: is, um, how hard or how much harder is fiscal policy making your guys' job? um, on the monetary side? you know, if I were to say, if I were to diagnose why the high inflation came, it's a Confluence of a bunch of factors. one is, yes, there was a lot of fiscal stimulus and a lot of monetary stimulus hitting the economy when covid was at full bloom, and that was a time when the services side of our economy was shut, so you had all the stimulus that had to just be channeled towards Goods. so people's spending habits exploded in the goods economy. but the goods economy was where you also had the supply chain disruptions, and so it was a Confluence of events. and then you had Russia invading Ukraine. that drove commodity prices skyrocketing, which also hit the goods side of the economy as well. so all of that conspire to the very high inflation. you know I, um, with the benefit of hindsight, we were late in raising interest rates. with the benefit of hindsight, I think people will history will say, hey, the stimulus ended up being bigger than it was needed. but I also give some grace to the fiscal policy makers because, you know, we, I was talking to some of the best health experts in the country country about the pandemic, and the best health experts said it would be 5 to 10 years to develop effective covid vaccines, if ever. and by a miracle of science, we had multiple highly effective vaccines within a year, which then shortened the duration of the pandemic. and so when, when I look at what Congress was doing, when they were sizing their stimulus, they were sizing it based on what it seemed was likely for the course of the pandemic, and then it ended up that we could reopen the economy more quickly, and so, so you know I give some Grace, uh, that people were make doing their best, making their best call, given the uncertainty that we faced at the time. but I think was a Confluence of those events that caused the high inflation and now, as those things are unwinding, you're seeing inflation fall back down quite rapidly. others- I'm gonna pick on Patrick Baker so I didn't get a chance to acknowledge him, but he is a school board member here and uh we acknowledge all of our public official. so um talk about the school district uh and efforts related to um making sure that uh m is set up for the future with our young people. well, thanks uh, Andy, you know uh. I thought I would sit in the back here and just you cruise on by, but uh no, I think you know the the a couple challenges our school district is facing right uh. one is uh the de demographic shs are are hitting schools first, uh, because people are having less kids uh, and that'll be. less children means less money uh, and so we're we're grappling with that as a school district. um, but the other piece that we're trying to Pivot now to is your point exactly about uh talent and how Talent is everything, how Talent will fuel economies, right, and so uh, when we look at our schools and how we talk about uh, where we can improve the amount of exposure that we can get our kids to businesses and get them in our community uh and get them a pathway to employment here versus somewhere else, uh is a strong interest of uh- me for sure, and I think our, our board and our district leadership, and so, to the extent that you have any good uh examples or advice or perspective for folks that are, uh, trying to design education model for the next 25 years, um, and change a model that really hasn't changed much since the Puritans came over and gave it to us, um, we're all, we're all for it, but I, we, I have a strong interest in having our kids here and kind of locking the key and not letting them leave and, uh, given a free market, we can't quite do that, but, uh, as much exposure to our businesses as we can. so, do a favor, keep the M, keep the microphone for a second. I want to follow up with a question before I answer your question, which is: earlier today I heard that the Mano population is growing, that there's a lot of construction going on, especially in multif family. that led me to believe, to assume, that your school age population would also be growing, but it sounds like that's not the case. so, uh, it has stabilized and part of this is hard to know how much this was co? uh, and the explosion of other education options that sort of came to the floor, whether that be online or private schools or whatever, um, and and part of this is trying to really good grasp on demographics, right and, and how much that is real. the other thing I would say is: you know, the housing that is going up, predominantly in Mano, it's it's a lot of rental, um, and I don't know that it's being occupied by folks with families, um, because we are doing that same math in our head of, like God, there's housing everywhere, but these folks aren't showing up in our school district, um, and so I think the, the, the characteristics of people who are moving into some of that housing is different, I think, even now than it was uh 10 years ago. got it, and I'm sure there's housing builders in the room here somewhere that can uh give me more context. but we do see a lot of Housing and I am optimistic that it's going to give us some, and we are certainly, as a growing Regional economy, better position than uh most who are actively losing uh population, but the, the, the kids just aren't there in the same numbers. got it, thank you. so to your second question, um, or your second point, this is a challenge that smaller cities all around our region are facing, and I would just say I have seen examples of some smaller cities where there's a very strong partnership between the K through2 system, the community college system, the local College, the Chamber of Commerce, the business Community to try to, first of all a few things: make sure that the young people who are graduating have the skills that the businesses need. second of all, make investments in local amenities so that maybe somebody goes away to college, but then they, when they start to have a family, they want to go back to the town that they grew up in and it's a high quality of life. and again, I think that Broadband- to the extent that there's more work, remote work and Broadband is widespread. I think it adds a new dimension of opportunities. people can be entrepreneurs here. they don't necessarily need to be in the big in the Twin Cities. Etc ship their products and services around the world. so it's a it's a tough challenge. I'm not dismissing it at all, but it sounds to me like you're working on the right things to try to get this partnership, uh, to make this as an attractive place as possible for folks to raise their families. very good, others, Liz, did you have someone that? oh, back there, then we'll. good afternoon, Marcus Hein. I'm a small business owner, real estate investor. um, just kind of curious on talking a lot about about consumerism and I think, um being in a regional um Community like this, we have a lot of um median household income that's a lot lower than traditional major metropolitan areas. how do you look at the health of that average consumer? when you look at with interest rates and whether they're rising or lowering- there's always a lag effect to that- and with price levels still creeping up because inflation still going up but the rate is coming down, what do you look at when you forecast that as far as what the consumer Health's going to be? and when we look at like an economy where 65% of our spending in GDP is based on consumerism, how do we look at the health of that consumer outside of a major metropolitan area? yeah, thanks, so we pay a lot of attention on this. you know, when the pandemic hit and there was two things happened- I mean a bunch of things happened. a lot of stimulus, various stimulus checks- whether it's, uh, PPP money or it was direct checks to people or unemployment benefits, and people couldn't spend money on Services because the services economy was shut. in a sense, people had four savings. so a lot of big Banks reported to us that said their checking account balances of their customers soared during the pandemic. so I remember- I think it was the Bank of America CEO said this publicly- I'm not revealing anything secret- that their- their customer that used to have $1,000 in their savings or checking account on average had $77,000. it was a huge multiple. and the customer that had $10,000 had $30,000- not as big a multiple, but still a big multiple. and the one that had $500 had at $5,000. so generally the lower income customers had more savings relative than higher income customers. so we've been tracking as much as we can to try to see when is that money going to spent down, and it is being spent down much slower than I would have guessed. so, uh, for example, consumer spending, you said, is 65 or 70% of the economy. so it's really important. month after month, quarter after quarter, the consumer, the consumer spending numbers, keep surprising us at how resilient the American Consumer has been. now it's not all good news. we also track delinquencies. so if we look at credit card delinquencies and Auto Loan delinquencies, they are creeping up. they're back above roughly prepandemic levels. so the the trajectory is concerning, but the level itself is not that concerning yet, but it's from very low levels. they had very low delinquencies during the pandemic because people were effectively saving so much money, so we pay a lot of attention to it. last thing I'll say: almost two years ago I speculated in an essay that I wrote that it seemed like the economy was in what I called the high pressure equilibrium when that. what I meant by that was people were earning more money, they were spending more money and that kept the economy turning. and then they were earning more money and they were spending more money and they were not having to fund that consumption out of their savings. that's not 100% true. there's definitely evidence that they're spending down their savings, but it again it's spending. it's being spent down more slowly than I would have guessed. uh, given what's happened to inflation and what's happened to the broader economy, and so consumption has surprised us at how resilient it has been. we had time for one more question. thank you for coming uh, Jerry copel. I'm a retired Banker. uh, in this community in the southern Minnesota, um, we're hearing, I'm hearing a lot of uh some discussion or concern among the regional or large Bank CEOs about the sustainability and the, the ability to service the uh federal debt? um, is the Fed having discussions about? um, the level or sustainability of our national debt and how concern, Ed, as citizens, should we be in that regard as well? so you're going to- I I predict you're going to find my answer deeply unsatisfying- um, which is this: is this: is that segmentation between fiscal policy and monetary policy? you know, fiscal policy, as you know, is the domain of Congress and the executive branch to decide how much they want to tax the American people and what they want to spend on, versus how much debt they want to issue. that's squarely their job and their responsibility. our jobs are to keep inflation in check and to try to achieve maximum employment. at the same time, there's great- I'll say this- there is great uncertainty about how much debt a country can issue before it becomes a problem. there are countries, smaller countries, smaller economies, that have run into trouble, with lower levels of debt to GDP than we have today, and yet you have Japan, which has something like twice as much debt to GDP, and they seem to be able to fund their spending just fine. why is that? you know, there I've Heard lots of explanations and lots of theories. there's a lot of uncertainty, I would say this: we do know over the long term that what's enacted in current law is unsustainable. if you just look at the, the Congressional budget office is this nonpartisan group of economists that works for Congress and they forecast out what's in current law in Social Security and Medicare and Medicaid, just based on demographics alone. those programs grow to the Moon. we know that's impossible. something has to change. either somehow the demographics have to change, Maybe by a big immigration influx- excuse me, Andor- raising taxes or cutting benefits. somehow that has to get reconciled. um, and again, that's not the federal reserve's job to tr try to manage that. it's really up to Congress and the executive branch. but in the short run- we know, we know our job is it's inflation and maximum employment. very good, any other closing comments? well, I really appreciate it. you. great discussion, lot of really thoughtful questions. uh, always enjoy getting out. I've been to mano multiple times, always have fun visiting here and just really appreciate it. if you see things that you think are noteworthy, reach out to my colleagues and I at the Minneapolis fed. we'd love to hear from you. uh, and you know, overall I think I get a sense from folks in Mano is they feel pretty optimistic about the future. it's not all roses, you know. there's some challenges, but overall I sense optimism and that sounds pretty good to me. so thank you.