https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/qa-with-neel-kashkari-at-minnesota-womens-economic-roundtable-event

Q&A with Neel Kashkari at Minnesota Women’s Economic Roundtable event

September 3, 2025

Minnesota Women’s Economic Roundtable event in Minneapolis

Neel Kashkari

Most of you know that Minneapolis is home to one of the 12 uh regional Federal Reserve um um banks and Neil Kashkari has presided over that institution since 2016. Uh his territory is vast. It's Minnesota, Dakotas, Montana, northwestern Wisconsin, as well as the upper peninsula uh in uh Michigan. That's a lot of driving or flying as the case may be. Uh Neil's also a member of the Federal Open Market Committee and that's the one that sets the nation's monetary policy. We're so fortunate to have him here today. Um he did not begin as a finance guy. He was an aerospace engineer and he developed technology for NASA's space missions. Somewhere along the line, he found public service and finance and uh spent the rest of his career there, including as assistant secretary of treasury during the 2008 financial crisis where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program, also known as ARP. Joining Neil today is our very own Kate Kelly. And uh Kate's an MWR member as we know. She was also a former Minneapolis uh Fed board member. Kate led the PNC's expansion into Minnesota back in the day and she also founded and led the Minnesota Bank and Trust and she now serves on several boards, corporate and nonprofit. Neil, thank you again for joining us. Kate, thank you for facilitating what I know is going to be a fabulous discussion. Welcome. Hello everyone. It works great. Well, mission accomplished. I got on the stool without any accident. We're in good shape. Well, Lynn, thank you for that nice introduction. That saves me a whole page of notes. Um, so it's terrific. And we are thrilled. Again, I'm Kate Kelly. I'm thrilled to be here with Neil Kashikari. Um, not only have we worked together, but we've become very good friends along with his family, Christine. Um, Julie and TK or Tecumsa. Um, but it's just been a pleasure. So, we're we have a lot to cover today. So, thank you for the introduction. we can skip that whole part and go right into what's going on now. Um, before I dive in, do you have any welcome remarks or anything to share? >> Well, first of all, thank you for having me. It's great to be here. Uh, I see a lot of people I've gotten to know over the last decade that I've been here in Minneapolis. So, it's a treat to see so many friends here and so many new faces as well. So, I appreciate the great turnout. Thank you, Kate, uh, for inviting me and thank you for, uh, having us, Lynn. Really appreciate it. Um, you know, meetings like this, just before you get into the formal Q&A, meetings like this help me and my colleagues to do our jobs. Ultimately, our jobs are to represent all of you. I go back to Washington DC every six weeks where we set interest rates for the nation in Federal Open Market Committee meetings. Part of what I'm doing in those meetings is talking about what's happening here in our regional economy. So, the more that we can make this interactive, I'm happy to answer your questions. That's why I'm here. But I also want to hear from you. So, if you see things that are happening in your business or your corner of the economy that you think are noteworthy, I'd love to hear about it. Or if you hear me say something that you disagree with, I'd really love to hear about it. This will make me better informed because in a couple weeks, I'm going to go back to Washington DC for an FOMC meeting. and who knows what nugget of wisdom you may share with me that I'm able to then take back. So, thank you for having me. Great crowd here today. I really look forward to our discussion. >> Neil, do is this a good time to explain what the Beige Book is in case somebody gets in there? >> Sure. So, the Beige Book all so there are 12 Federal Reserve banks as Lynn said all 12 Federal Reserve banks uh add a chapter or a few pages to something that's called the Beige Book. Every six weeks the Federal Reserve system publishes this uh it's basically a collection of quotes and anecdotes from businesses and labor groups and workers large and small large and small uh businesses and workers and labor groups etc. uh to basically get a sense of what's happening in the economy and then economists and market participants will read this to kind of get a sense of what do we what are the anecdotes telling us. You know, we get a ton of data nationally and regionally on the economy, inflation data, employment data, GDP, sales, consumption, but a lot of times that data is confusing. Some some data sources say the economy is growing really strong. Other data sources the same week or the same month say no, the economy is cooling. Well, how do we make sense of that? Anecdotes and conversations that we have help us to make sense of those conflicting signals. And so, who knows what you say, maybe it gets added to the beige book on an unattributed basis, but I'll also tell you we are live streaming this. So, there will be some attribution to what you say because somebody online is going to hear you say it. That's great. I always thought it was an accomplishment to get in the beige book. That was fun. Um, anyway, as Neil meant, we we chatted and normally a fireside chat, we'd leave some room for Q&A at the end. Neil and I decided that we'll kind of feel a natural part during our fireside chat to kind of open it up because this is an amazing group of women leaders um just representing just a diverse uh spread across our community. So I think Neil really wants to hear from you and you can be as bold as you want with your questions. Um he answers those always just beautifully. So what we're going to do is somewhere in the fireside chat we'll open it up for questions as um Neil encouraged. We are going to have two people walking around with mics. So, raise your hand. They'll stop over to uh give you the mic. Please introduce yourself, your organization real quickly, and then get to your question. We'll try to get as many questions in as we can and then toward the end, we'll have a formal Q&A as well. So, watch for that. That's great. Well, um coming into this, what a great audience, first of all, not only in person, but live stream as Neil mentioned. And what a time for the Federal Reserve. I don't know if we've ever been in more headlines for the Federal Reserve than we are right now. Um, there's a lot going on. Um, but before we get into that, I was wondering, Neil, can you give us the basics of the Fed, the Fed's role, and how it differs from the fiscal and Congress's role? I think that would be a really good level setting for our questions. >> So, in 1913, the Congress passed something called the Federal Reserve Act that created the Federal Reserve system. So we are the nation's central bank and our jobs are to try to manage among other things try to manage the ups and downs of the US economy. You will hear us talk about something we call the dual mandate where we have two primary goals. One goal is we want stable prices which is inflation of around 2%. And the second goal is we want maximum employment as many Americans working as possible. Well when inflation took off after co what did we do? We raised interest rates aggressively to try to tamp the brakes on the economy and slow things down to bring inflation back down. We've made a lot of progress in bringing inflation back down. But we're not done yet. Inflation right now is running in the high twos depending on how you measure it. 2.7 2.8 3%. And we have our work to do to get it all the way back down to our 2% level. And at the same time, we want as many Americans working as possible. Sometimes these two things are in conflict. If we slam the brakes in the economy to bring inflation down, we might push unemployment up at the same time. And so you'll hear us talk about a soft landing, which is get inflation down, but keep the labor market strong. We've made a lot of progress on that, but we're not done yet. Inflation is still too high, but at the same time, the labor market is showing some signs of cooling. So, it's we're getting into a tricky position now for the Fed. Now, that's separate from fiscal policy. We all pay taxes, either local, state, or federal taxes, and then our elected leaders decide what to spend that money on, how much to tax us, and what to spend money on, whether it's health care or defense or education. That's fiscal policy. Our jobs are to handle monetary policy. The system is designed for us to be independent of politics. And then Congress's job with the executive branch is to decide taxing and spending policy. That's inherently a political process that our elected leaders make those decisions. >> And that leads us into maybe understanding a little more about the FOMC. I mean just the makeup. We have a a meeting coming up. What is it September 17th? And um that'll be a dynamic one. Can you explain just I mean I I just picked up the papers this morning. We have the governors. we have uh you know how many of the bank presidents voting. Can you just give us a little overview? >> So this was um in 1913 when Congress decided to create the central bank they did something unique. They wanted to keep it as far removed from the political process as possible. So there are seven governors in Washington who were appointed by the president of United States. So, President Trump in his first term appointed a few. President uh Biden appointed some and now President Trump is now appointed somebody whose confirmation hearing is later this week. They those individuals, there's seven of them, serve up to 14-year terms. So, that's a long term. And the idea is you wouldn't get a lot of turnover when there's a new administration that comes in. On top of that, you have 12 independent Federal Reserve banks. So, I was not appointed by the president of United States. I was appointed by a local board of directors of business and civic leaders. Kate served on my board for example for six years until she reached her term limit. So that way we are even more independent of the political process because we are appointed locally by local business and civic leaders. So at the FOMC you have 19 people, you have seven governors and 12 reserve bank presidents and then the presidents rotate in how we actually are voting on that committee. So it's a quite convoluted structure, quite complicated, but it actually works. You actually get representation from the regions across the country. And you have a system that is quite well insulated from the day-to-day politics that so often dominates, you know, what we see in the news all the time. And that's that's by design. >> Y and we might come back to that because it is in the news a little more than normal. Um but first I'd love to just chat about the inflationary pressures and the pressure from Trump to drop rates coming up on the next FOMC meeting. Um can you describe what your you and your colleagues are watching in the data and in the anecdotal comments on inflation and you touched on the pandemic. Maybe you can describe how it's different than at that time. You know um I I mentioned that inflation is coming down and so we look at all the underlying components of inflation. One area that inflation is coming down is housing inflation. And this is happening as we expect. That doesn't mean home prices are falling. That doesn't mean rents are falling. It means the growth of rents and the growth of home prices are slowing down. That's coming down. We expected this to happen because we look at the new leases that people are paying. some if you move to a new apartment, we can there there are series that track that and we could see that when lease rates soared, it took a couple years for that to work its way through all of the other inflation data. Well, then lease rates slowed and then we said, okay, that probably means that housing inflation in the measured statistics is going to fall. That's on track. That's happening. Services inflation has been declining. It's leveled off a little bit, but it has been declining. wage growth has been declining. Services and wage growth tend to be closely linked. So all of that suggests the economy is cooling, the labor market is cooling, things are slowing. We're achieving that soft landing. Now the wrinkle of course are tariffs. So before the pandemic, goods prices. So you you buy goods and you buy services. Goods inflation used to be negative. The reason that goods inflation was negative most years is because manufacturing was becoming more productive and we were buying a lot of goods from abroad and their manufacturing was becoming more productive. So we were actually seeing declining prices in the same good that you would buy. That was important to get our overall inflation level down. Well, before the tariffs hit, goods inflation had fallen back down to prepandemic levels. It had become negative again. But now goods inflation is climbing. Why is it climbing? It's climbing because of tariffs. Because if you charge a tariff, which is a tax increase on goods that you're buying from abroad, the prices of those goods are going to be higher. So, we're not surprised by that. But that is pushing up now. So, the some components of inflation continue to come down. The goods inflation is pushing that back up. So, the average inflation rate is kind of moving sideways right now. So, a big debate that we're having is are these tariffs going to lead to a one-time effect, you know, transitory, you've heard us use that word before. Is it going to be temporary or is it going to be something that's more persistent? And that's what we're trying to watch and trying to understand. There are theories why it should be transitory, temporary, and there are theories why it might be more persistent. And so, I'm in the camp of, hey, we need to kind of watch this before we reach any firm conclusions. any commentary on influences of AI? Um, it feels immigration, >> you know. Um, well, immigration is a huge factor that's changed this year. The the prior years, two or three years, there was, if you looked at the the data on net immigration flows in President Obama's terms and President Trump's first term, they were pretty consistent. In the Biden administration, they skyrocketed. And now they've basically plummeted. And so to go from the a labor force that was growing at gang busters levels to now that's growing very slowly is making the economic signals that are always confusing even more confused for us because you know one thing we look at is how many jobs does the economy need to create every month to keep up with population growth. In the peak of the last few years, it was probably I'm I'm gonna guess 150,000 a month. We needed to keep up just with population growth because immigration was high. It's now probably about 75,000 a month. So when you see a job report that comes out like this Friday, is it a good job report or a bad job report? Well, you need some baseline of good relative to what? And so there's a lot of uncertainty, but we know the immigration numbers are a lot lower. And if you have fewer people joining the workforce, GDP growth is going to be slower because you have fewer people producing things and you have fewer people buying things. So GDP growth will be slower. So that's that immigration is a big factor that we're studying and watching what it means. And then AI, my I mean I'm a bullish on AI. I'm very pro I think it's going to be really important for the economy. Most major economic innovation or excuse me technology innovations in the last hundred years took decades before they really showed up and move the needle of an economy as big as ours. So I will I'm very skeptical that AI is already showing up in the economic data. Will it show up eventually? Yes. Maybe. I mean is it going to show up faster than electricity showed up? Maybe. You know the internal combustion engine. These are the types of things I'm talking about that are transformational. Those generally took decades to really show up and move the needle of our national economy. I'm skeptical that after just two or three years, we're already seeing a meaningful imprint of AI, but I think it'll happen. >> And then consumer sentiment. I mean, when I was on Neil's board, I just learned, you know, kept hearing as goes the consumer goes the economy. I mean, it's a huge element. What are you picking up as you visit with groups like today? >> You know, this has been true now for the last few years. Um, first of all, understandably, the American people hate inflation. So, people were gloomy, gloomy, gloomy about the economy because they hated going to the grocery store and seeing these higher prices than they were used to paying. Me, too. By the way, I do most of the grocery shopping for my family. Um, so they would answer surveys saying, "We're doom and gloom." And then they'd spend lots of money on Taylor Swift tickets, okay? And and airplane tickets and going out to restaurants. And so there was a disconnect between what people were saying and what people were doing. Um I think that disconnect has diminished over time and we are seeing uh consumption growth is definitely lower than it was a year ago and people are still feeling nervous about the economy. Now flip the flip side of that is stock markets are booming, financial markets are booming and so now those are generally wealthier people. So maybe wealthier people are feeling more optimistic and are investing more. But there are there are sometimes mixed signals between what people how how people report that they're feeling and what they're actually doing at that time. >> I was going to ask you about BLS data, but that seems like old news now. But uh the integrity that's important, right? >> We we rely on lots of different data sources. We rely heavily on the national statistics that are produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics that you mentioned and the Bureau of Economic Analysis among others and the census among others. These are all critical data sources for us, for other policy makers and for businesses and financial markets. Uh so we need the best data we possibly can get and then we supplement that data with data provided by the private sector and a lot of times those data tell similar stories but not always. And so the the gold standard has been and needs to continue to be the government data that gets provided recognizing it's not perfect and it will not be perfect but it's it's that important >> and there is some political pressure around that. Um but it continues in other arenas and that would be my next really interesting topic to discuss with Neil here is um we can't escape the political atmosphere and economics and the Fed having an influence. Can you explain why the independence of the Federal Reserve is so important? It might be obvious, but I think it's worth touching on. >> Well, this is one of the things that the economics profession and central banking and governments in advanced economies all around the world have figured out over the past 40 or 50 years is having an independent central bank that is making the best decisions they can based on data rather than politics leads to better economic outcomes for the country. And I'll give you an example of this where how this really manifests itself. If you all believe that we are not serious about in getting inflation back down, then you're going to change your behavior in such ways without realizing it. You're going to change your behavior that makes that inflation more likely to happen. It's a funny thing about economics, macroeconomics. It's a little bit about mass psychology of what everybody believes and then based on what you believe you change your behaviors and sometimes it makes those beliefs become more uh more likely to happen. And that's true on inflation. If we all believe high inflation is here to stay, you're going to go to your boss and you're going to say, "I need a raise so that my family can just keep up their basic level of standard standard of living." or if you have employees, you're going to say, "Boy, I know I need to pay my people more because they're not going to they're going to be frustrated if their family is falling behind." And then what you're going to do is you're going to go to your customers and you're going to charge them more. And you're going to say, "Hey, you see the high inflation that I see, I have to charge you more." And you're going to go to your suppliers and your suppliers are going to say, "Hey, I need to charge you more." So this psychology gets embedded in the society and it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Our job at the Fed and the central bank's job is to not let that happen. And when it starts to happen to hit the brakes, to break that cycle so it doesn't happen. The more you have confidence, the American people, market participants, people all around the world have confidence that the Fed and other central banks are making decisions based on data, not on politics, the more you're going to trust. Hey, they said they're going to get inflation back down to 2%. We believe them. And I'll give you a little ane little data point anecdote that was comforting for me. So when inflation exploded during postcoid, we had a round table of labor unions to hear what are you seeing? What are your workers experiencing? How are your wage negotiations going? And they never said they never talked about inflation. But if you looked at the math of the what they were asking for from their companies on behalf of their members, you could see that they were trying to get their members caught up to the high prices, but they were implicitly assuming inflation was going to go back down to normal levels. They again, they didn't use those words, but when I looked at the math of what they were asking for, that was true. I could see there they had confidence we were going to get inflation back down. If they didn't have that confidence, they'd be saying, "Hey, I don't just need a 7% raise this year for my members. I need it next year and next year and then a year after that." And then that vicious cycle starts to take off. And so that's why indep confidence of and it's not just independence, confidence of independence of the central bank is so important for us being effective in getting inflation and keeping it low, getting it down and keeping it down. And can you kind of br um update all of us on this the current situation with the FOMC uh membership or the committee? Right now we have two governors. One that's resigned recently in August and the other one that is I don't know what to refer to her. She's not fired yet because she's pushing back. But coming into the next meeting, that's going to make a big difference, isn't it, in the discussion? Well, I don't think it'll make a big difference in the discussion because there's 19 of us around the table. Uh, so what Kate is referring to is one of my colleagues, Governor Audriana Cougler. She was appointed by President Biden. The way these 14-year terms work, they serve the balance of whatever remaining term is on that seat. So, she only had a couple years anyway. Her term was going to conclude at the end of January, but she decided in August to resign early, creating an opening. And then President Trump has appointed somebody who I believe his confirmation hearing is sometime this week. So if the Senate acts, he may well be in the meeting in two weeks from now. So we may have we may have a full quorum of 19 people there. And then the you referenced Governor Lisa Cook who there have been some questions about the mortgages that she uh signed up for before she was a Fed governor and President Trump announced that he was firing her and now it's the courts are going to judge whether or not this meets the standard for removing her or not. I and I have no information about this other than what's been in the press. So you know what I know. I don't have a view of that. Um, I do know that both Adriana Cougler and Lisa Cook are first class colleagues, serious economists, uh, brought great data and analysis and insight to the deliberations. And so, um, I I look forward hopefully to Lisa being able to continue to contribute because she is a very high quality colleague whose opinion I I valued. Um, nonetheless, there are 19 of us around the table, all bringing our own lifetime of experiences, all bringing our own data and analysis that we look at that we rely on. And then the the deliberation is it's the best argument wins. I mean, it's like who if you can bring good arguments to the table, you will persuade your colleagues that, hey, the your view on monetary policy is the right one or is the better one. And so I'm confident that we have a robust group of people around the table who are committed to achieving the mandates that Congress has given us. And I don't think that that's going to change. >> And we're thrilled that you're in that conversation because a little tidbit, Neil was appointed in 2016 and is the longest standing bank regional president in that conversation. So that's wonderful. We're proud of that. Yeah. Be ready. We're going to be opening it up for questions real soon. I want to ask though one other um kind of topic of questions on the global economy. Um we are really the reserve currency in the US for the world and that's can you just speak to the importance of that and and um maybe a few things going on right now have people kind of concerned about that? So what what causes one currency to be the reserve currency? What causes that? It's a symptom of which major economy do investors around the world have the most confidence in. Whatever major economy that is will be the well it'll end up working out that will be the reserve currency and far and away the US economy is the most competitive economy in the world. I mean we are walking away from Europe. Uh while you know we talked about AI and how big an impact is it going to have Europe's approach to AI seems to be let's try to stop it that's not going to work okay now maybe you can try to manage it but you should certainly participate in it they generally have a culture of let's they're afraid of innovation I mean I'm overstating it but not that much. Uh so and if you compare us to China has some things going for it. They've got scale, but if you look at their demographics over the next 50 years, they just fall off a cliff. I mean, D China is and we have while we're not perfect at uh managing immigration, uh I'm the son of immigrants, my wife is an immigrant, we do it better than anybody else just about, China is abysmal at it. It is just not even an option. So, when I think about the US's competitive position relative to China, there's no contest. Uh so what's going to cause us to lose our reserve currency status if we really hurt our own competitiveness or one of these other major economies really becomes very very competitive. Uh I don't see the latter happening. Now is it possible we could do things that hurts our own competitiveness? It's certainly possible. I hope we don't. Um but you know I feel good about the US maintaining its reserve currency status. But it it is a relative game. It's not just up to us. So, we have to keep our house in order and then we'll see what other countries do. >> I love that positive not as several world leaders are meeting in China. So, it's um you know that's that's really good to hear. I really want to be careful to reserve the remainder of our time for questions unless you think we haven't covered something. And as a reminder, yeah, just raise your hand. We have two people running around with mics. Thank you, Lynn, and somebody else over here. And then mention your name, your organization, and then ask your question if you would. And again, this is being live streamed, so we want to make sure they can all hear. >> Uh question from the chat be well, we walking around from uh Shondaanda Smith Baker says, "Economic inequity remains one of the biggest challenges for our region and nation. What role do you believe the Fed can play in fostering a more inclusive economy?" >> Well, one thing uh we do is we do a lot of research on the economy. We have a we have a couple centers at the Minneapolis Fed. One is we call it our center for Indian country development. We have a lot of Native American tribes in our region who have very different economic experiences than just about anybody else and they've had structural challenges and barriers to their development for decad for centuries and so we have a research center focusing on trying to understand what are those barriers understand what's happening in tribal economies so that other policy makers fiscal policy makers have the data that they need as they try to design programs to serve Indian countries so research is a big role that we can play. Another one we have this thing called the opportunity and inclusive growth institute which is literally focusing on economic disparities and barriers not just racial barriers there's rural urban barriers there are many many uh ways of slicing this where there are barriers to people participating in economic growth and opportunity and I'm very excited about the research that's being done in both centers now with monetary policy the tool that we have you can't target it at Minnesota or California or New York or this group or that group. We're all in the same economy. We're all using the same dollar. So, we have the bluntest of all instruments. So, we cannot use our monetary policy tools to drive the kind of changes that the uh that Shondaanda is asking about, but we can certainly do research that helps us understand the labor market and understand what these barriers are. And that that research could help other policy makers to tackle these issues. I'm Sheila Riggs from the University of Minnesota. I want to follow up on Kate's question about artificial intelligence and what you've talked about. I'm bullish uh on it too. And um the mag seven the you know there's the huge AI companies seem to have a a big proportion uh of the publicly traded companies is how do you factor that into uh your your work quarter in quarter out >> you know it it doesn't so much factor in I mean and I don't want to say it doesn't factor it doesn't concern me but when we look at for example I'll ask a question, why is the stock market booming? And then one way we'll slice the data is, well, you take the mag seven out, what is everybody else experiencing? Or what are small cap stocks experiencing? Are their earnings growing differently to try to get slices of different slices of what's happening in the underlying economy? I mean, it's a very complicated question you're asking because in the future, are the mag seven going to dominate AI? Are other innovative companies going to come along and you know beat them at their at their own game so to speak? I don't know the answers to that. Uh but just looking at the headline stock market might be sending us a misleading signal if other parts of the stock market are experiencing something very different. >> Thanks so much for being here today. Nisha Boche. I'm the dean at the Humphrey School of Public Affairs and so I have an education related question. Minnesota faces some of the nation's largest achievement gaps and the con and that connects directly to our uh future workforce. At the same time, higher ed is dealing with rising costs, an enrollment cliff, and what is perhaps not recognized as much um too few college ready students coming out of K12. Why does the Federal Reserve care about these issues? And I think that's perhaps a softball question. Um, and what kinds of investments do you think are critical to sustain a strong and equitable economy? >> Well, we, you know, I appreciate the softball. I'll take them when I, it's not very often I get them, so I'll take them when I get them. Um, we care a lot because it's all about our labor force. And, you know, it goes back to we have to achieve maximum employment. That's one of our goals. Well, how do we do that? Well, if people are not educated to participate in our economy, maximum employment is going to look a lot smaller than if everybody gets a good education and everybody can contribute. So, it's directly related to maximum employment, directly related to our GDP. How big is our economy going to be? How vibrant is it going to be? So, that's critically important in terms of what to do. Um, I mean, there's a lot underneath what you said. So, like you said, a lot of students are showing up. those who can go to college are not ready. So then the colleges that I meet with say, "Oh yeah, we spend the first year remediating get trying to get high school students just up to basic levels to be able to do college work." That's not the best use of I mean it's important that they do it, but it'd be better if those students were already ready when they showed up there. And then you also touched on the fact that many colleges, especially smaller colleges, are losing students and you're going to have you're going to end up seeing more consolidation. I think it's inevitable you're going to see more consolidation across higher education all across the country and that those are you know tough challenges for those individual campuses or those individual colleges and then finally costs continue to balloon for families. I mean it cannot be that we just simply have to ask families and students to take on more and more debt. That is not a sustainable model. It is not a model that's going to position us for competitive success for the next 50 years or next hundred years. So we have to pioneer ways of giving worldclass education to more of our students at lower costs that if it doesn't do that I mean that's got to be job number one. How do you scale highquality education? And so you know I'm not going to offer you an answer. I'll look to you and other university leaders at what models you are considering or you're you're innovating to try to achieve that. But that's what we have to do. It cannot be more debt. That's not the answer. >> Hi, good afternoon. Thank you, Cinnamon P. And my questions are, how does the Fed assess the impact of changes on low-income communities and how do you make sure that uh employment gains are equitably distributed and especially in this climate sort of what steps are being taken to ensure trust and transparency. Thank you. >> Well, we do a lot of outreach. One of my colleagues Alen Chernumoff is here who leads among other things. She leads one of our groups that uh does a lot of this work where we go out and we don't just ask businesses, "What are you experiencing?" We ask workers, "What are you experiencing in the economy?" We ask low-income workers, "What are you experiencing in the economy?" And a lot of times we get different, we learn different things. So my first four or five years that I was here, if we looked at the national statistics, it looked like we were at maximum employment. And I'd go meet with businesses and they would say, "It's a historic worker shortage. There no more workers out there." And then I would go into low-income communities in Minnesota and they'd say, "We need jobs." Or, "We're stuck in part-time jobs and we need full-time work." And I said, "I don't understand. All these businesses just told me that there are no more workers out here." And an hour later, I go to this meeting and these folks are looking for work. What's going on? What I realized was that there were people out there who wanted to work and that if the economy was allowed to grow and allowed to run a little bit hot, businesses would work harder to go find workers and bring them into those jobs. I'll give you one more I mean I could go on this topic for an hour. I won't. I'll give you one more anecdote. Um during COVID, you know, the economy started to reopen. I went to a gas station near my house and there was a help wanted sign on the door and I asked the manager. I said, "What's it like trying to hire somebody?" He's like, "I've never seen it like this. It's impossible for me to find workers. I've been a gas station owner for 30 years. I can't find anybody." And I asked him, I said, "What is it normally like?" He said, "Well, normally I put a help wanted sign up and that day I have a lineup of people to pick from for my gas station job." So my take away from that is why was that normal? A gas station in the normal economy says help wanted and there's a line of people that cannot possibly be a healthy economy if that's normal. So anyway, I'm giving you a long rambling answer because there's a lot underneath your question. One of the things I've learned is if the economy is allowed to grow and businesses have to compete to find workers, they work harder to reach the workers they normally wouldn't even try. And then that gives those folks a shot and then they come in and they're able to contribute. They're able to provide for themselves. They're able to develop skills and then it ends up being a virt virtuous cycle instead of a vicious cycle but a what I called it a higher pressure economy that we achieved in like 2018 2019. We started to see real gains for people on lower income communities that had before not been able to participate. Hi, thanks for being here. Akua Ellis, uh, principal strategist for Able Endeavors. Um, I like many folks have been aware of the data that has been circulating around the fate of black women in the in the workforce. In particular, over the last few months, over 300,000 leaving the workforce. Um I will tell you from personal experience and from the conversations that I'm having that there are many that see the fate of your colleague um Lisa Cook as um illustrative of what's happening more broadly. So just want to name that particularly as you go into this conversation um the next the next meeting. Um what I'm curious to know is what research has been done to um explain or articulate the impact of this trend on the broader um economy and also the impact of income inequality particularly in in in matters of quality of life like um crime. Um, in terms of the recent trends that you're talking about, I think it's too soon for there to be new research having been done, but it's something we're paying attention to. We do know that in economic downturns, traditionally, uh, black and brown Americans tend to be the first to lose their jobs and then in recoveries, they tend to be the last ones hired. >> Please, >> so what has the impact of the way in the marketplace. >> Well, I >> yeah, I mean, I think, you know, they represent a very important part of our economy, a very important part of our labor force. So, if they are pushed out, so to speak, then that they're not able to contribute. I mean, it it has direct impact on them and their families and their immediate communities, but it has effects on GDP broadly, how big our economy is, how vibrant our economy is. And that's why my comment a moment ago is one of the things I was proud of is the economy we achieved in 2018 2019 before the pandemic. We called it a higher pressure economy. And what that meant was businesses were frustrated that they couldn't find workers. But then they were, you know, they they were reducing their own barriers to try to bring people in because they needed to. And that benefited some of the folks that you're talking about. it benefited black and brown people, men and women, disproportionately, because you saw them start to finally close gaps uh in that in the later stages of that expansion. And so I think there are tremendous benefits from being able to achieve that. And that's why we want to keep the economy, we want to keep the labor market strong, but at the same time, we got to get inflation all the way back down. So the scenario that we're in right now of a labor market that is cooling, your your evidence suggests that it is cooling and inflation that's running too hot is a very difficult situation for a central bank because we have one tool. Our one tool can push down inflation and the labor market or it can push up inflation and the labor market. And so now we're at this touchy area where we have to be very careful that we don't overdo it one way or the other. >> Mr. Qashqari, thank you for being here. I'm Lisa Ericson. I'm retired from US Bank Wealth Management. So in years, some some of the survey data that you mentioned that the Fed relies on has had declining participation, which obviously raises questions about, you know, how uh the accuracy of that. And so I was just curious uh your thoughts on um how we can address some of that trend, people just not participating and returning the surveys as well as the impact on the Fed decision-making. >> Yeah, so you're right. Uh over time, especially COVID, a lot of these surveys are done by uh landlines and if people have stopped using landlines or just have cell phones or just use the internet, participation has gone down. There are people much more expert than I am, professional data scientists, economists who do this work who are trying to pioneer new ways of getting this data to make sure that we have the data. And you know, when if you survey people who only answer their cell phone, it's a different survey than if you survey people who only answer their te their physical landline if they still have a physical landline. And so there are people who are working on this, take it very seriously, who want to address it. My message is simply we need to support them so they can do their best work to figure this out because the data is as important as you said it is. >> Good afternoon. Leanne Rasjack, CEO of Women Venture. We're the only CDFI focused on women in the state of Minnesota. Um my question is regarding child care as infrastructure. One of the greatest opportunities that we have uh in the state and across the country is to solve for child care as a crisis and as an issue. There are many people including those in my neighborhood, those who are low and moderate income clients who want to work and cannot because child care is either not affordable or they can't find a provider. Many of them are exiting. So would like to get your perspective when we think about workforce and uh workforce development and keeping women in it. uh what's your perspective around child care as infrastructure? >> So it's but you're all asking me these very serious substantive meaty questions and I have lots of thoughts. So uh my wife and I have two young children a four and a half almost 5-year-old son and now a daughter six and a half. Our daughter just entered first grade. Our daughter has one more year of pre-k before he enters kindergarten. So we've been in the childare market for the last six years. I've thought a lot about this. Um, and I my first question was, I don't understand how can it be so expensive and how can the folks who work there make so little, right? Those two things like there's two problems going on here and if we're going to solve their elevate their wages, then it's going to be even more expensive. So, what's the solution? Then I finally came up with an analogy which is this. It's a lot like agriculture. All around the world, countries subsidize agriculture. Why? because they want high prices for farmers and low prices for consumers. Those two things are directly in conflict. And the only way you can achieve high prices for farmers and low prices for consumers is with subsidies. The only way you can achieve higher wages for quality childare workers and affordability for middle class families is with subsidies. Now, it's not the Fed's job to advocate for subsidies. It's for the political system. It's for all of you. But that's the math. And so, um, and the other thing I realized is, you know, there's a lot of it is how things are labeled. So, if a mom or dad is staying home taking care of the child, they are in the workforce. They're just not in the measured workforce. Because if I hire somebody else to take care of my son or daughter so that I can go to work, that person's in the workforce. So part of it is complicated by what are we counting as in the workforce and a parent staying home with the children are not counted but they are doing very important work for their family and for society. But at the root of this is affordability and decent wages for the workers so that those childcare centers don't close. It is about somebody subsidizing it. Whether it's businesses subsidizing it which there's some anecdotes of that or states or the federal government. It's I'm not here to say good idea or bad idea. I'm just laying out the math and then all of you can decide what's right. >> Thank you. Uh President Kashkari, my name is Amad Hansen. I'm with the Mortonson Family Foundation and my question is something that you alluded to earlier. um recently read that the administration has currently removed approximately 1.2 million immigrants uh from the country. Uh and in Minnesota, my understanding is about 86% of farm workers are immigrants and about 45% of those immigrants are undocumented. As this administration continues to persecute immigrants across the country, what is that specifically going to do to our food costs in Minnesota? How does that impact our economy as a whole, not just here, but nationally? I mean, if if if there were far fewer people to work on farms in your example or work in meat processing plants as an example, which I think a lot of immigrants also work there, the ones that I've toured, that was certainly true. Uh naturally, you would expect to see prices go up because they'd be able to produce less. If you have got supply and demand, and demand is what it is, but supply gets produced because there are fewer workers to produce whatever that good is. you're going to see the price end up going up ultimately to try to attract more workers to come in and whatnot. So, I think there would be an inflationary impact. I know many I've seen the headlines that many businesses have been arguing, hey, these folks are doing critical work on behalf of the American people and that some waiverss have been granted and whatnot. I don't know the details of that. Um, but it is something to pay very close attention to because it will affect the economy overall and it will affect inflation especially in the sectors that are directly affected as you indicated. >> Hi Jill Walker. I'm a partner with PWC part of the deals practice. So I help companies with acquisitions divestures access to the capital markets. So I'm curious Neil what you see um in the next 12 to 18 months from an interest rate perspective and how you think that's going to affect companies from a deals and a capital markets perspective. Well, why don't you tell me what's going to happen with tariffs and with tariff inflation and then I'll tell you what happens with with inflation. Um I I mean I have every reason to believe I'm not forecasting a recession. I have every reason to believe that uh the cooling that we're seeing will probably continue and it'll be somewhat gentle. I would expect right now the federal funds rate our official rate is running between 4.25 and 4.5%. That's a range that we set. And if you look at the estimates that the Federal Open Market Committee members have put out of what we think the neutral rate is, it's somewhere around 3%. It's highly uncertain. So that suggests that interest rates have some room to come down gently over the next couple years. That's a reasonable guess, but you know, there are big macro factors including tariffs uh that we still need to watch that'll ultimately have an effect on that Maryland. Uh Neil Marilyn Nelson, tell us how we keep hearing about our national debt. How does the Fed think about that and is there anything we should be doing or thinking about it? We don't know how exactly to interface with it. We were warned about it. We've talked a little bit about reserve currency. There's the implication that that impacts that. help us to think through how we should be thinking of this problem that we're facing. >> Well, we pay a lot of attention to this. So, the national debt is in the domain of fiscal policy. It's a it's the outcome of the taxing and spending decisions that Congress and the administration have made over decades. So, in some sense, it's not the Fed's job and we don't set interest rates thinking about the national debt, but we pay attention to the national debt because it affects the economy. And so, that's what we need to pay attention to. But in terms of the debt, if you look at the forecast, and I think I'm telling you things you already know. If you look at the forecasts over the next 30 or 40 years, the debt just goes hyperbolic, almost hyperbolic, and it's driven by the aging of our society and lower fertility rates. Um, so what could you do about it? I mean, this is a this is a challenge for our political system. You either raise revenue, you uh cut spending. Raising revenue is hard. cutting spending is hard. Um, andor you embrace immigration. Like the that's one thing that's out there that if we got our arms around an immigration system that fed our economy, you could actually adjust those demographic ratios. Right now, the ratios are going negative because we're not having children at the same rate that we had in prior generations. You could you could move the needle on that with immigration. And so, um, I would look to you and other leaders in the room about this is a question for our political system. It is not a question for the Fed. And I'm not saying this because I'm trying to wipe my hands of it. I think it's really important, but it literally is the job of our political system to make these decisions. >> Is it inflationary? >> Is it inflationary? Well, um, that's a that's a another tricky question. Um, you know, at a very simple level, it might not be. If so, if I if the government uh raises debt by going to Americans and saying, "Give us your savings. We're going to take your savings and we're going to pay you money back in the future." And then the government spends that money. Well, you're not spending the money. The government's spending that money. So, that by itself is not necessarily inflationary. But that gets complicated when you look at the world economy. And if ultimately we're trying to uh spend more than we can produce and if the Fed were to lose its independence and to try to print money to support that spending, that would be inflationary. So I'm confident if the Fed is independent, we can keep inflation in check. But that doesn't mean that the national debt is not going to be an issue 20 years from now or 30 years from now. So those are related but adjacent issues. Thank you, President Kashkai. Great conversation. I'm Allison Barman with Genesis Works. One of the things I've been concerned about and trying to get my arms around is the reduction in funding, whether that's to the CDC, the NIH, um the Foundation. What are the uh economic impacts of that over the short term and the long term? And and is it is it uh you know, how big of an impact is that? I mean I think over the long term it's something if it's not restored or some level of it's not restored and it might be spending on different things but over decades our government funding of basic research has led to our competitive position. It's been a huge contributor whether it was the space program or the defense program or innovations in healthcare. Uh they've been huge sources of competitive strength for America for ourselves and relative to the whole world. And so u I hope you know long term that we are committed to science. Uh it's just critical for our economic competitiveness. And same thing with our university system. I mean attracting the best and brightest from around the world. uh investing in them, encouraging them to stay, to be part of our society, to be part of our community, to build companies here. All of that to me works together and is kind of the secret sauce of America's competitive edge the last hundred years and hopefully for the next hundred years. So, I I think it's really important long term. Now, you know, could somebody argue that changes need to be made into what the investments were and how they're being made? You know, certainly one could make that argument, but I think the government funding of basic research. I think that that's absolutely clear. It's clearly important. >> Uh, President Qashqari, thank you for being here again. Um, my name is Neil Lee Taminga. We're named twins and um, I serve in two different hats and that's what I want to talk about, the employment side of the dual mandate. Uh, I consult on the economy. I serve on a public company board. We bring some economic knowledge there. I also am the director of the school of business at a local little small faith-based private university that is known for social mobility, North Central University. Um, what we're seeing is that our students who are reasonably prepared are having a very difficult time procuring employment. In fact, I think the national numbers speak to that unto the 20 to 24 age demographic, kind of about up 200 basis points or so of unemployment over the last 18 months. How much does the Fed actually consider that not just in the form of workplace readiness, but also maybe as a proxy to employers not wanting to quite yet make that investment in their 40-year kind of workforce, labor force? How much does that factor into the dual mandate? I mean it's it's an early signal that we pay attention to of another sign of a softening labor market because as you said you know we said I said earlier you tend to see when economic downturns happen oftent times uh black and brown Americans lose their jobs first or they they get hired last and you start to see some of these early you know new new college graduates take longer to find jobs as well. It's another early sign that we're paying attention to and watching carefully. Um, so it, you know, it matters a lot and I think the data that you said resonates with what I have seen and anecdotally what I have heard as well. >> Going once, going twice. Kate, over to you. And I'm going to turn it over to Neil with any parting comments for us. Um, as I look at this group of amazing women and as I hear your thoughtful questions, what a great time to send us off with a positive note maybe and or um or you know, why not engage us in something that you think uh you you've referenced a few things, but I'm just going to turn over to you for any final remarks, Neil. And by the way, thank you so much for being here. >> Well, thank you for having me. Great discussion. I I'm going to repeat something I said a little while ago, which is uh you know, as much as we feel um like there's a lot of frustration in our country, whether it's about the economy or about politics or what what I wouldn't trade places with any other country in the world by a mile. Not even close. And so, uh our competitive position, we have some challenges. We need to get our ducks in a we need to fix some things fine th those are things that are within our control they're actually these are things we can solve and again I would just would not trade places with any other country in the world and I said my parents were immigrants from India 50 60 years ago they've since passed my wife is an immigrant from the Philippines um been here for 15 20 years uh there's a reason immigrants want to come here you know and so while we look in the mirror and we look at each other and we get frustrated that things are not perfect and maybe they're far from perfect. Let's not lose sight of this is still an amazing country and I wouldn't trade places with any other country in the world. And the and the proof of that is not just Neil's opinion. The proof of that is where do people want to move and they still want to move here. And so let's you know let's focus on the positive. Let's fix the negative but let's not lose sight of that there's some a lot of positive too. >> Thank you Neil. [Applause]
