https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/neel-kashkari-in-discussion-at-star-tribunes-north-star-summit-2025

Neel Kashkari in Discussion at Star Tribune’s North Star Summit 2025

October 7, 2025

Star Tribune’s North Star Summit 2025 in Minneapolis

Neel Kashkari

growth in the Midwest and beyond. Guiding today's conversation is Josh Boke, White House reporter for the Associated Press. >> It's great to be here in Minneapolis. Uh, I think it's the best city in America, >> but I'm not supposed to have strong opinion, so we're just gonna keep that. Maybe someone disagrees in audio, but uh, I'm Josh Boke. I cover the White House and economic policy for AP. And I'm joined by two fascinating individuals, and we're going to talk about the economy and AI. But I wanted to start Ronnie and Neil. Tell us what you do. What does it mean to be a chief economist at OpenAI? What does it mean to run the Minneapolis Fed? Let's level set so everyone knows the full extent of your powers like we would in say like a superhero movie. >> Well, first thanks Josh. It's great to see you again, be with you after working with you over the years and Neil, an honor to be here with you. I've followed your career for a long time and really admire your work and great to be here in Minneapolis. Um, it's a fantastic opportunity to talk to folks about the impact of AI in the economy. Uh when I got the job, my wife asked me, you know, what does a chief economist do at OpenAI and there really wasn't a template. It's the first chief economist at any of the frontier laboratories. And so thinking about how the economics of AI are going to unfold is really the biggest part of my job. When you go to a cocktail party as an economist, you're often not like the most popular person in the room. You know, people people will, you know, sometimes ask you questions about the stock market, like, you know, is it going to go up or down or something like that, but in general now biggest question is what is AI going to do to my job? And a big part of my work is to analyze the data in the job market in the macro uh economic sense as well and interact it with the data we have on how people are using chat GBT and our other tools to figure out where the economy is going and it's been a ride of a lifetime over the last year doing that kind of work. >> Gotcha. >> Well, uh good morning. Great to be with all of you. Thanks for having me. The Minneapolis Fed is one of the nation's 12 regional uh central banks, part of our the Federal Reserve system. There's the board of governors that you've probably heard of in Washington DC. The chairman of the Federal Reserve Board is Jerome Powell. And then there are these 12 independent Federal Reserve banks. And if you go back in history, there's a long history of uh for better or worse of central banking in America culminating in the Federal Reserve Act that Congress wrote in 1913. And they wanted the nation central bank to be distributed around the country, not simply housed in the nation's capital or housed in New York City. So my job at the Minneapolis Fed and my colleagues there are 1100 employees at the Minneapolis Fed. Our jobs are to represent all of you. I go back to Washington DC every six weeks for Federal Open Market Committee meetings. In those meetings, we are debating what's happening in the national economy. And what I'm doing in those meetings in part is talking about what's happening here on the ground in our region so that we can make the best decision we can for the country as a whole. We cannot set a different monetary policy for Minnesota and for California and New York. We need to try to come up with the optimal policy for the nation as a whole. But my job is to represent this region and to make sure that what's happening on the ground here is part of that deliberative process. Now, at the Minneapolis Fed, we do a lot more than just monetary policy. You know, if you go to your ATM and you take cash out from your ATM, that cash will have started out in the vault at the Minneapolis Fed. So we process cash for banks, make sure that the banks and your ATMs have enough cash. Uh we provide wire transfer services. A lot of the infrastructure behind the US economy. We supervise banks. We do a lot of different things, but the thing that we're known best for is to try to read the ups and downs of the US economy to try to get inflation back down while we keep the labor market strong. And a lot of times, we're going to get into this today, a lot of the times the data that we look at is sending mixed signals. And so conversations like this help us make sense of the mixed signals that the data is seeing is sending us. So I'm glad to be here with you. >> Great. I I'm gonna do the most dangerous thing a reporter can do and open my notebook for questions. And and you recently got back from the FOMC meeting in DC. And Neil, you put together a really provocative note. I think for a nerd like me, what you said was that the labor market appears to be weakening and it looked like inflation could be elevated for a year or two close to 3%. So that everyone knows, the Fed targets inflation at 2%. So what we're talking about possibly is fewer job opportunities and higher prices than what people are used to. And I'm curious for what you think that means for an everyday American and everyday business. If that's the environment, what should we expect? I mean, it's challenging. Obviously, we've all lived through very high inflation of the last several years. One of the things that we learned, maybe we didn't need to learn it, but we did learn it, is the American people hate high inflation. I mean, really, viscerally hate it. I go, I do most of the grocery shopping for my family. I still have sticker shock when I'm buying groceries every Saturday morning. my brain is not yet adjusted to the new reality, the prices that we're facing. So, our jobs at the Fed are to get inflation all the way back down to our 2% target. First of all, what does that mean? That means inflation, that doesn't mean prices falling. That means they they don't climb that quickly going forward. Uh, and we also try to keep the job market strong. So, tariffs, we know do something. We know that tariffs push up prices on the goods that we're buying from abroad and they can slow down economic activity. So, in the worst example, like the a word that you've probably heard of before is stagflation, which means you have high inflation and low economic growth. Some of the data that we're looking at is sending some stagflationary signals. So, the the job market is slowing. Employers around the country are not hiring very much. Thankfully, they're not laying off people very much either. Uh and yet, you're seeing this high inflation sticking at around a 3% rate. So, a big question mark for us is is this tariff inflation going to be shortlived and then we're going to start trending back down to that 2% inflation or is it going to be sticky at around a 3% level? I would just say it's too soon for us to reach any firm conclusions. >> In other words, keep on worrying. It kind of sounds like you're saying and and I want to get to what has been driving economic growth this year. Did anyone use chat GPT today this morning? >> A decent number of people. I I did too. Good answer. I asked them to calculate some some economic data and it took 116 seconds for GPT5 to do it. And by my own measure, if I did it independently, it would have taken me 11 minutes. So that's a time savings. Now the interesting thing is the AI buildout over the last year has been responsible for 92% of the economic growth in the first six months of the United States. That's according to Harvard University economist Jason Ferman. Right? So without it we wouldn't necessarily be having growth. It's increased uh the stock market. Right? And I'm curious, is the dependence of the economy on the AI buildout a good thing or a risk in that it could be a bubble and maybe all these bets go sideways. Let me talk a little bit about where the economic value is coming from using CHBT, what many of you did this morning and what's driving GDP and I'd love to hear Neil's perspective on this of course as well given where he sits. So we just released a paper called how people use chatbt which is um the first time we've ever analyzed our own data and shared it with the public. So we used about 1 million uh conversations from the platform and we tried to classify them preserving privacy to understand what people were actually talking about. And just if you're interested in the Minnesota angle we looked at one million of those conversations in the last week just so I could do this talk and I I I didn't use chat for this. In Minnesota 27% of those conversations are about editing and writing text. So people are often giving chachiki something they've written and saying hey can you make this better. The second most popular use case in Minnesota 21% is around learning education. There's a ton of young people on the platform who are using chachi to learn. So that's the typical use cases in Minnesota if you look at the 1 million conversations over the last uh week. In our paper what we found is chach helps people make decisions. People are using it to ask questions to seek information and to express themselves. Now, that might not sound like really exciting economics, but economists call this consumer surplus. If I have something that's free for a lot of people and it helps me make a decision or save time, that doesn't show up in GDP. It doesn't show up in the total number of goods and services produced in the economy, but it creates a lot of value for consumers. Independent estimate from Stanford finds that is probably close to about a hundred billion dollars a year for the US economy in terms of your time saved, my time saved, Neil's time saved. >> 100 billion in a $30 trillion economy. Yes. right now you're looking at a third of a percentage point >> right now consumer surplus from this the second piece is what you're talking about which is the capital expenditures building AI infrastructure right when you look at our GDP numbers you look at professor Ferman's studies what we're talking about here is building data centers putting GPUs graphical processing units memory chips into that infrastructure connecting up to the grid and powering the training and inference of AI models that's not the classic AI driving productivity sort of story when you bring it into your company that is an infrastructure investment in the United States that's driving econom economic growth. So that is happening. At the same time that we're also hoping to see more productivity increases in companies which we'll we'll talk about later. Those are the two kinds of economic value that that Chachi and Open AAI are creating. I would say you want to have a diversified economy where you're not only relying on let's say consumer spending which is 75% of GDP growth usually or GDP in the United States. So you want to make sure that infrastructure is really important but there are other things driving economic growth which I'm sure Neil and others have thoughts on. So that's what's happening now and you definitely want to diversify that base going forward. Neil, >> I thought that was a great um I thought that was a great explanation. One of the challenges is, you know, while the labor market seems to be slowing, it's getting a lot of headlines that there's not a lot of job creation in the economy right now. Firms aren't hiring, they're not firing, the stock market continues to reach high after high after high. And if you look at it, it's not just the giant seven tech companies. It generally is across different types of publicly traded companies, not just giant companies, midsize companies as well. And so what's going on? How do you read that? And I know I agree with the the comments that a lot of the in investment that's been going on has been focused on the tech sector, but how broader is it? It seems to be helping other companies that are not just the Googles of the world or the Microsofts of the world. And why is that? And how sustainable? And so I think your question is right on. A lot of people are wrestling with is this uh is this investment ultimately going to pay off or there are examples in the past where there have been massive investments with a lot of hype that didn't pay off or didn't pay off for decades later. And for me, I think it's still too soon to too soon to know. We've looked at economists have studied prior technological breakthroughs. Generally, those prior technological breakthroughs take 10, 20, 30 years before they really change the trajectory of the economy. And so, personally, I'm long-term bullish on AI. I'm skeptical that you're seeing a lot of workers being replaced with AI right now. It feels to me like it's way too soon. And I'll give you another example. Five years ago, we heard from the best experts in Silicon Valley who all told us that self-driving cars were right around the corner. and all the long haul truck drivers were about to be out of work. That has not remotely been true. Now, I think long I think that self-driving cars will eventually materialize, but these things tend to take a lot longer than the enthusiasts initially predict. And so, I'm I'm still bullish on labor. I think that there's a very very very important role for workers in the US economy and in the global economy. And I think that's going to be true for the foreseeable future. But Neil, I I want to understand and unpack that a little bit more, right? Because we saw the CEO of Walmart say they're going to have a hiring freeze over the next three years because of AI. Walmart has historically been the largest employer in the United States. In many counties that voted for President Donald Trump, Walmart is the single largest private employer. If they're signaling that, how worried should we be about job disruption, job displacement, and companies saying we can maximize profits because in an AI setup, workers are costs, not necessarily resources. >> You know, uh I'm not at all dismissive of what I take that very seriously what the Walmart CEO said. We're hearing lots of grand declarations, but we're not seeing the evidence yet. You know when the the analogy that a lot of people use is when automation was first brought to agriculture, people forecast the end of labor, right? Labor changed. People went from working on farm on farms to in factories and the nature of work changed. So I do believe that the nature of jobs is going to change. the way we're going to use these tools is going to change and people are going to be forced either willingly or unwillingly to take on more productive jobs where their skills are better utilized. So, I mean, we'll see. You know, five years ago, some CEOs of auto companies said that the internal combustion engine was dead and 100% electric vehicles going forward. They're now reversing those those predictions. And so, uh, I pay attention, but I'm I'm cautious. Can I just want to build on Neil's point, which is excellent, and just say um this is why for nerds, forecasting is really important because he's exactly right. 90% of Americans, let's say, worked in agriculture in the year 1800. And now about 2% of Americans work in agriculture. We produce more food than ever before. And those jobs transition to other sectors. And we have more jobs, right? Higher paid jobs than we did in in those years. The speed of that transition really matters, right? That happened over 200 years more. And so if we see a fast takeoff to AI and it happens much more quickly, policy makers, officials at the Fed, people at the labs need to be prepared for that. But over the longer term, if we have time to adjust to these changes, it's a very different story. And so the job actually, I mean, of Fed, right, or a lab like ours with data on AI is to help people understand what is coming in forecast. And that's why we do research. And I think that's why your research team of,00 people does the work they do. So it's an interesting way to think about why we do what we do on the econ research side. So one thing that I think doesn't often get discussed enough within AI is that it's being built on top of society as it is and there are pre-existing trends in the US economy and I'm curious for what trends do you think AI accelerates in which trends do you think it disrupts >> in my sort of idea I think we're if you look at the the sort of the push towards increasing productivity AI is definitely a productivity enhancing tool. That's how it's being pitched, but not in the way a lot of people are thinking about, not substreaming for workers. Right now, it's complimenting us. It helps you prepare for the panel. It helps me run analysis for my economic reports. Right now, people are using AI to enhance productivity. And that's a trend that's going to continue to increase every time a new technology comes about. Think about the iPhone, right? Now, all of a sudden, you can do all this work, right? Working mobile. Then you can have your email and your apps on there. And eventually became a productivity unlocking device. You're going to use AI the same way right now, probably through your mobile device for the time being. Over time though, I think a couple of the trends that we're seeing could actually decelerate or reverse. Let me give you an example. I got three kids. One of the biggest challenges right now is around screen time and lack of human interaction particularly after co at a time when machines are becoming ascended where they can do so much for us where there's so much intelligence the human experience might actually matter more to us than did before. Let me just say this one more time because it's counterintuitive. We tend to think that these STEM skills are the most important thing for people to learn. When those become more commoditized, when anyone in this room can code and now I can code much better than I did before using chatbt, all of a sudden what's going to count in the job market could start to change. The scarcity might be less on the technical skills and more on the soft skills, leadership, EQ, bringing people together. And ironically, we might actually prize those human interactions more because of AI. That's something to watch going forward, whether AI actually brings us closer together on the human factors. But in terms of enhancing productivity, we all have incentives at work to use AI to get our jobs done better. that is going to keep accelerating. >> You know, uh your comments made me think of two examples which make me uh cautious. One example is one of the biggest technology developments over the past 15 or 20 years is social media. I would argue social media is not productivity enhancing. Okay? It is almost certainly productivity destroying. Now, you may say, well, there's all this consumer surplus. Do we get pleasure from using Instagram? And I don't Twitter. I don't know how you get pleasure using Twitter, but uh nonetheless, you may enjoy it. You might enjoy spending your time there. So, you know, is it actually going to be productivity enhancing? I hope so. Another example I'll give you is at the Fed, we've we've for the last seven or eight years been on this uh journey to move many of our in-house applications to the cloud as many corporations have. When we first made these decisions to move to the cloud, we were told we're going to save all this money. Now we're told actually you don't save any money going to the cloud but you have better stability and you have more capability etc etc. So it might it may well be that we don't actually save money by using these tools, but maybe we do end up doing more stuff and maybe that ends up showing up as productivity. You know, we will see. And so with all of these forecasts, I think my for me my overwhelming message is let's uh not rush to judgment. You know, let's let's I'm pro innovation. I think America is leading the world in all of this, which is great. I would much rather be leading the world than lagging behind. But what is the ultimate implication going to be on our on our economy, on our workforce, on our society? For me, I think it's far too soon to know. >> One thing that often doesn't get enough discussion, but people see it, right? They see um AI can have an impact on the question of what is real and what is not real. When Joe Biden put together the executive order on AI, weirdly enough, at Camp David, he watched a Mission Impossible movie where AI was the villain. And the question was fundamental truth. And I'm curious for how do you structure a market economy based on trust if the commonality of truth and fact are in doubt? >> I mean, it's it's critically important. I so much of our economy is based on trust. The entire financial system is one that is based on trust. I mean, you go to your bank, you deposit your paycheck, hopefully automatic deposit, uh, and then you've got confidence that it's there. You've got confidence that the data on your on your statement is correct. If that trust is broken, our financial system, our economy doesn't work. So, my only I mean, I'm I'm nervous for the reason that you articulated in your question, but I'm also optimistic that I think these tools can be utilized on the other side of that. These tools can be utilized to enhance trust. You I can imagine a scenario where you have AI tools helping us verify that the data that we're looking at is actually accurate, that it's actually real, and you're ending up utilizing AI to combat bad uses of AI at the same time. I don't think it'll just be up to us as humans to make those conclusions completely on our own. >> I mean, I'm with Neil on this one where I think number one, his earlier point about being humble about being able to predict the future and not overselling or underelling the impact of AI. You don't want the United States or Midwest region to fall behind on that for sure and I don't think that's going to happen but you also don't want to predict so much that you know that you're overhyping people and they're expecting big changes right away. So there's there's a balance to his point about trust. I mean I feel like we could ask you this question working in the media like what what is happening in people's trust. I would say separate from AI like we've seen a huge decline in trust in all of our institutions right from business to media. I mean pretty much everyone in the audience works in an organization that people trust less than they did 10 years ago. So we we all have like an answer to this question maybe. For me, I think that it might be that AI um contributes to more lack of trust. People can't know what they're looking at. It's going to be up to companies and governments to figure out how to make sure to show people it's authentic. I also think though on Neil's point, sometimes new technology enhances trust in ways that we didn't expect. Do you remember the first time you used your credit card to buy something on the internet? I mean, there's a transition for those of us who know that where you'd say, you're going to give your credit card to the internet. What are they going to do with that? Now, you tell me you feel more secure buying something on Amazon than you do at a local merchant using your credit card. You can get your credit card information stolen both ways and a lot a lot of people in this audience are using their credit card online in a way that would have been unfathomable 25 years ago. Trusting the commercial system. On the other hand, the social media effects that Neil's talked about working the other direction. So which one will AI bring in is like I think an open interesting question. It probably depends on the application verticals where we're applying it. Finance, healthcare, education as opposed to like the fundamental science of AI and what we're doing open AI. That's how I think about it. >> I mean >> good thoughts, right? I don't know how the truth or trust question goes but I do know at least in journalism the ability to provide raw facts becomes more essential if people depend on this technology and the question is how do you align those market incentives? I do think one thing often when we discuss AI we take an American centric uh focus but when you talk to folks in DC this is a global race and curious for what you think that global race looks like and what does winning look like in this concept given that you have countries with a variety of conflicting interests on AI. I can start first on this one. This is really important. It's important here in the regional context too. If you think about the companies driving growth of this region, a lot of them are global companies. They get a large share of profits and revenue from sales to other countries and operate in globally competitive markets. Metronic or St. or companies like this are in global competition, right? So, it's not just competing in the United States. I've traveled to about I guess 10 countries in 10 months for open AI. So, uh while that has taught me a lot about how to use frequent fire miles well, um it's also showed me the different opinions around AI um around the world. If you go to a place like India or Korea, they're very optimistic about the applications of AI in their society. Why is that? For a lot of countries in the global south, the uh kind of the old regime, the way geopolitics was set up, the way the economic order was set up, they didn't really feel like they were benefiting too much from that. And they see AI as an opportunity to leaprog and expand their economy in a way they haven't had for a long time. They see they see it as an accelerator. In a place like Korea or Japan, the workforce is actually aging and they don't have enough people to do many of the jobs. So the whole conversation of jobs is very different. They don't have enough people to be home health aids. They don't have enough people to be teaching in classes. They don't have a lot of the different applications that we think of here where you have an abundant supply of labor and lots of immigration with their fertility rates being lower and immigration being lower. They're thinking about AI as augmenting humans and helping solve some of those problems. In Europe, there's a big discussion about what are we going to do this time. They feel like they fell behind in some areas when it came to the internet and enterprise software and cloud. To Neil's point, um, a lot of the environment for entrepreneurship regulation there meant that a lot of the companies that dominate those markets are not from Europe. And the question for Europeans is how do we build our own homegrown companies with a regulatory environment that suits our values and culture and companies that can scale with the capital markets we have? And they don't necessarily want to see a repeat of what happened with the previous technologies with AI. But it's a complicated dance. The US is well positioned. We have the leading AI companies in the world. We have the deepest capital markets and credit markets. And we have a skilled and dynamic workforce. So we're in a really good place, right? And I would say that we can continue to press that advantage. But other countries uh particularly ones that you might not be on your radar are really all are basically creating and articulating very specific AI strategies that are going to make them players as well. We have to pay attention to I mean I don't have a lot to add to that. I thought that was a very thoughtful synopsis. I would just say competitively speaking we have uh we have lots of challenges in our country and I think we are all acutely aware of our challenges and I bet everybody in this audience will have your own take of what the challenges are in our country and a wide range of opinions. But I would just say this, I wouldn't trade places with any other country in the world. And it's not even close if you look at just on the economics how competitive our economy is. Even if you comp do a compare and contrast to us and our neighbor to the north, Canada, you know, I I was shocked when I looked at the data and you look at the productivity trends in America over the last decade and compare us to Canada. I had assumed because you have NAFTA or the US MCA. So you have essentially free flow of capital across the border and you got a lot of mobility across the border and companies have supply chains that go back and forth and pretty similar cultures, similar rule of law. I would have thought our e economic performance would be similar. They could not be more different. And if we are pulling away from Canada so dramatically and we are pulling away from Europe so dramatically then you look at China there's a lot of uh angst about you know China's economic power. If you just forecast their demographics over the next 30 years they are hitting a wall. It is a wall that will have profound effects on their economy. And so yes we have a lot of challenges. We have a lot to figure out that we're wrestling with today. But we are exceptionally well positioned on the global stage to compete and win economically. And I don't mean win at the expense of somebody else. This is a place where everybody can participate in. But I I would not I don't want us to lose sight of how well positioned competitively we are uh compared to every other advanced economy in the world. I think that's a really important perspective, Neil, and it gets at a paradox, right? Which is the United States has never been so wealthy and yet so unhappy, >> right? Like during the election, you would talk to people who moved to Phoenix because that was the place where you could have an affordable home. And then during the pandemic, everyone chose to move to Phoenix and homes no longer became affordable. If you owned a home, you felt you couldn't sell it because you couldn't buy something. And if you moved in, you felt like you couldn't afford it, so maybe you should move back to the Midwest instead. And I'm curious with AI, even if it makes us more competitive, does it take those feelings of economic security in issues of inequality and amplify them? And if so, how do we as a society adjust? >> And that's a that's that's a question far beyond a lowly central banker could possibly try to weigh in on. I'll tell you this. So, um, you know, my parents are immigrants from India. I was born in Ohio. By the way, I went to the I'm a lifelong Cleveland Browns fan and I went to the game this weekend and it was the perfect Cleveland Browns ending to every Cleveland Browns game, which is they found a way to lose at the end. And by the way, Minnesota was very, very well represented. There were a ton of Vikings fan fans at the game this weekend. My wife is from the Philippines. She's an immigrant from the Philippines. And I was in the Philippines a few years ago visiting my wife's family. And her then 16-year-old niece said to me, "Boy, a lot of the stuff you guys in America are arguing over, it's really because you have things so good." And it was a heck of an insightful comment from a 16-year-old girl in Manila about what she sees uh kind of in the news coming from America relative to what they are experiencing in so much of the rest of the world. So, I don't have an answer for you, but I hope we can look around the world and pause and reflect on, hey, not everything's perfect here. We do have real challenges, but boy, we have a lot going for us. Yeah, I'll only add I mean, I think I'm with Neil on this, but I also think that the last several decades have brought a lot of big um issues around uncertainty in the economy. Like when I joined government for the first time, right after Neil, I it was the sort of the deaths of the financial crisis, right? So, it was the biggest economic downturn since the Great Depression. And there I was as an economist trying to figure out what to do. Next time I came back to government, it was co. So I mean there's been a generation here that's been bookended by pretty serious um sort of disruptions to economic life, but also the way they socialize, the way they get out into the world, the way they live, work, and play. And when you talk to younger people today about AI, they sometimes have that same anxiety. It's been changed up on them a couple times and they haven't necessarily seen that run that you saw in the United States between let's say the 1950s post World War II era to the early 90s where you had 40 years of sort of unin uninterrupted economic growth in a straight line going one direction. We haven't seen that for a little while and I think that is probably coloring some of the experiences and AI makes people more anxious because they're worried it'll be another one of those. >> Okay, I want to step back and I want to get on a subject that judging by my emails everyone suddenly cares about which is their utility bills. Do we have enough electricity for the data centers for this AI buildout? And are we setting up a situation in which we are asking families to essentially subsidize through higher payments the electricity that AI needs in order to build out? >> I can start. Yeah. So as you think about this, we must invest in the grid and expand our capacity to generate power. Otherwise, the AI infrastructure uh buildout won't happen. And from the regulatory side, from the business side, from the policy side, we we can't ask consumers to be footing that bill. This infrastructure, right, is going to power amazing applications about training new models and inference from those models that will have business applications and consumer value. At the end of the day, it's got to be a shared project. So, I think you got to look at our partners in this. As we're building infrastructure, we're working with a bunch of sort of utility companies. You're working with infrastructure builders who are actually building the data centers and chip manufacturers and designers like Nvidia and AMD. All of these folks are working together to find a way to bring those costs down. A couple areas I just want to highlight. One is chip design is really important. If you talk to someone designing chips um at these major companies 10 years ago, you know, power and sort of uh power consumption wasn't necessarily number one on the list in terms of features you were optimizing for. Now, given the context how much computing we're going to be using, this is like a a tremendous area of innovation. If you walk through a data center, cooling is really really important. That's what takes a lot of the energy to cool, right? The chips and the associated hardware in the data center. There's a lot of innovation around how to do that more easily, right? On the utility side, right? They're investing a lot in monitoring sort of what the load is. So they can use okay, if we have a workflow that's related to training, we might not be able to interrupt it, but if it's inference, we might be able to have some latency in it. These are all methods that people are pioneering now to try to save on energy. But the buildout won't happen unless we make investments in reliability in the grid. and the situation you're talking about if electricity prices which we're already increasing for a variety of reasons anyway if that continues to happen then we won't be able to build the infrastructure we need that's just not ten of them >> you know I would add you if you increase massive demand for electricity on average electricity prices are going to go up across the economy for everybody one of the things that I'm very focused on in my role is are of course interest rates and if there's mass what sets interest rates in the economy there's this concept that we care a lot about the Fed of the neutral interest rate. What interest rate balances supply and demand for investment? So investors demand investment capital and savers are saving money and those two things balance out. That sets where interest rates are. Well, there's massive demand for investment capital to build data centers on average that's going to push up interest rates across the economy because what ends up happening is that capital has to come from somewhere. And so when I I wrote about this a couple weeks ago, which is I could imagine a scenario where even if the Fed embarks on one or more interest rate cuts, it may not translate into lower mortgage rates because the capital that would have been building homes or apartment buildings is being diverted to instead build data centers which are generating a more a stronger investment return. And so we work in this global economy, we work in a national economy. And if you see a boom in one part of the economy, it has effects everywhere else. And some of the effects are for good. Some of the effects can be challenging for those other sectors. And so this is something that we're trying to work out. So what we hope is at the bottom at the end of the day, we hope that this massive investment is not misinvestment. It's not malinvestment, meaning it actually is not going to be wasted. It's going to generate a positive return for the economy overall. If it does, uh, I think we'll all be better off for it in the long run. But it still can create some shortrun challenges. I mean, a lot of people are saying we want to see the housing market unlocked. They're hoping that few cuts to interest rates are going to do it. I'm not convinced that a few cuts to interest rates are going to translate into very much lower mortgage costs because so much of this investment capital is going outside of the housing sector or the apartment building sector. >> And I want to unpack that a little bit more, right? Because come May, there could be a new chair of the Federal Reserve. We might see increased influence by President Donald Trump. And he has not talked about a minimal rate cut. He has talked about a rate cut of 200 even 300 basis points. If what you're saying is true in the natural the neutral rate is higher because of this dynamic, but the Fed Fed's rates drastically lower, what happens >> uh if the Fed, excuse me, if the Fed drastically lowered interest rates below where the neutral rate was and it wasn't justified for the reasons that I just described, what we would expect to see happen is you'd expect to see the economy have a burst of high inflation. Basically, if you try to drive the economy faster than its potential to grow and its potential to produce, prices end up just going up across the economy. So we have this thing that we talk about a lot called a dual mandate. The Congress told us Congress created the Fed and Congress assigned us our goals. One of our goals is stable prices, 2% inflation. The other one is maximum employment. If we were to cut interest rates dramatically beyond what is justified based on the economics, you would then see probably a very low unemployment rate and very high inflation as the economy was effectively overheating. But the other thing is, you know, we are we're a committee. So there are 12 Federal Reserve banks. There are seven Federal Reserve governors. The Federal Open Market Committee ultimately sets interest rates. And the committee as a whole, I believe, is absolutely committed to making making decisions based on data and analysis, not on political considerations. And that's an important point because what you're essentially saying is that whomever Trump would put in that position has to make a compelling databased argument in the room, but also probably to the wider public is that we're very transparent. I mean, the the chairman of the Fed gives a press conference after every one of our meetings. You know, people criticize that the Fed presidents talk a lot. Maybe we talk enough or maybe we talk too much. But we're all out there talking about here's the data that we're looking at. Here's why we're making the recommendations that we're making so that people can see we're making our best assessment of what's happening in the economy and our best recommendations based on that assessment and ultimately in the committee meeting room there are 19 participants who are all putting the best arguments forward and you have to persuade your colleagues ultimately to have influence and so I'm confident that the Federal Open Market Committee will continue to make uh decisions based on data and analysis. So, we're also lucky for your biographies on this stage. I don't know if everyone knows this, but not only are we with two people who are economic policy makers, but they also made the arduous and I would say tortured choice to run for public office statewide >> and losing. >> And oftentimes when you interview economic policy makers, they would struggle to door knock. they would struggle to appear outside a subway asking for people's votes. On the flip side, if you interview a politician, sometimes their ideas about how the economy works appears to be divine from like the inards of birds. And so I'm curious, yeah, >> from your dual experiences, >> what do policy makers not understand about the public and what does the public not understand about choices that policy makers have to do have to make. >> Yeah, I I'll start and you know I was inspired a lot by by Neil's example to be to tell you the truth. I think one key thing when you think about sort of testing for public office, I ran for state treasurer of my home state. It's like the most important position no one ever heard of, the treasur of North Carolina. Um you're the sole fiduciary of our hundred billion dollar pension fund. So it's really important job, but people don't necessarily know a lot about it. My parents growing up were state employees, immigrants from India just like Neil's. And so I thought a lot about like that retirement security and their health care. And that was why I thought Treasure would be a great position. And of course when you do something like that, you're forced to come out of the ivory tower or out of a company wherever you're working and actually ask people what they really think about the economy. And I think what's eye opening for someone like me is two things. One is to understand that people actually usually assume you have a lot more power than you do. Um you know I people would take me aside at you know state fairs which North Carolina's got a great state fair in case you're interested. um in all parts of North Carolina, rural, urban areas, churches, um and say, "Look, like, can you help me with this healthcare issue? I'm having trouble seeing a doctor." And I would try to explain like, you know, the state treasurer, you know, I'm not totally involved in that area. I could try, but these are very very sort of important concerns. And people said, "This guy over here, because I'm elected, can help me solve this." I started to realize that gosh, as people have mistrust in government, distrust in government, they also think that we can do amazing things. And the question is how do you help people solve problems calibrate them effectively to say hey things can't necessarily change as quickly as you think you know if I can get you that doctor's appointment what about all the other people who are waiting and so that's one challenge on terms of I think what the public thinks versus what we can do on the ecom policy side Neil and I both know this having worked in the private sector the public sector running for office we have these elegant theories we have the way we think markets should work we have the way businesses should behave but in the real world when you're speaking at a political event you're talking to someone about sort of door knockocking or getting out there and making the argument You got to keep it simple because people have a lot of things going on and you don't have a bunch of time to explain, you know, either like how chat GPT works or the natural in neutral rate of interest. You got to go there and tell people what you're going to do for them. And I think for us thinking about summarizing without losing the really important nuance of what we're saying key because if you don't have a message people actually understand and can hear in a bumper sticker, it's very unlikely they're going to care about the position you're running for. The last thing I'll say is I mean people like Neil out there doing some of this stuff, I mean watching it is really important. You have like you or looks like you or has similar background running for these things. It's very very important. You know, I didn't think growing up I was a son of immigrants. My parents were not involved in the US political system. I thought, you know, someone like me should never get out there and run. But my name is like 13 letters. How do I fit on the yard sign? You know, it's like these are the questions I had, right? But the idea that I could do that and seeing other people do it and serving in high level government positions was something like okay. And I and I hope that now there's a lot more openness regardless of your political party to go out there and try it particularly if you're a policy wonk particularly if you really care because in the end policy is great but the people who are elected are usually the ones who are making it happen in terms of implementing that policy and so putting yourself to the test can be a really good experience. >> You I would just add when I ran for office I ran for governor of California in 2014 and then I moved to Minnesota. I've been here for 10 years had a wonderful experience. Um the vast majority of people that I met from homeless people very wealthy people want more or less the same thing. The vast majority of people when you're talking to them want a fair chance to get a good job, get a decent job for their kids to get a good education, to have a better life than themselves. And when you talk to people on a personal level about what they actually want, you know, the partisanship and the letter next to your name kind of falls away pretty quickly. And I always remember that when I think about my current work at the Fed and what we're trying to do, what do people want? You know, and and that actually maps to the Fed's mandate pretty well, which is a stable economy, a growing economy, low unemployment. Hey, if we can achieve that, that's a pretty good thing that most people will benefit from. Doesn't solve all problems in society, but boy, it's a great backdrop uh for for I think our communities broadly. And so, and one of the nice things about being at the Fed is because we're a nonpartisan institution, I get to go out into communities all across our region, uh, and they're open to hearing from me. You know, if I'd had a letter next to my name, you right away you lose half your audience. And so, because I don't have a letter next to my name in this role, uh, people give me a chance to explain what we're doing. And when I when I have the chance to explain it, most people say, "Okay, uh, these folks are trying to do their best." I appreciate that. So, uh, I think that's totally helpful. We've got about 90 seconds left, so I'm gonna ask some lightning rounds. Okay. So, when we think about AI, there's this question of is AI just going to have a few skills and maybe we have way more cars driving, or is it going to be general intelligence in which there's an everything box and it does everything? What do you think we should be planning for? An AI that does everything or an AI with detailed limited roles. >> I think you should prepare for lightning round wise AI that has general intelligence, very very good at a lot of tasks. You'd be very surprised by the things it cannot do. >> Like what's something you think it >> I think the human interaction piece is going to be really important. I I think at the end of the day, AI might be able to teach my kid some math, but I'm still always going to demand I want a human teacher working with my child. I think it's it's going to be very different. And so I think AI can do some things. We can win an international math Olympia. We can win a gold medal with CHBT right now, but it doesn't mean that I want my kid to learn math from Chad alone. That's that's where I think the angles are broadly capable AI, but you're going to have many applications where either you don't want it or it cannot serve the purpose that you need on the Got Dale. >> Uh I think it's the narrow problems, specific AI for narrow problems that it does very well is my forecast for the foreseeable future. >> In AI as it as it's being used, is it more likely to be imitative or innovative? In other words, if I said to Chat GBT, "Hey, give me the new Taylor Swift album Chat GPT style, all new imitating her style, where is it going to be innovative and find that new thing?" Where do you think we're more likely to see it used? >> Depends how you use the tool. If you are using a chatbot, right, you might ask a question like that. If you build on our API the way a lot of people developers would do, you can create something brand new. So, it could be used for innovation for sure. >> Any doubts? >> I'm skeptical. uh the little bit that I know of it, you know, when I hear uh AI companies saying that they're running out of data in the world to train these things, that tells me it's one giant mimicry device. Uh and so, you know, a little a little child does not have access to the world's data. Yet, that little child can dream new dreams. And so, if all the AI is doing is mimicking complicated mimicry of what it's seeing around the world, uh that's not creating something new. Okay, we have just exceeded our time. I could keep this going for two hours. Thank you so much for your patience and your wonderful answers. Thank you. >> Thank you. Good stuff, man. >> Thanks so much.