https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/neel-kashkari-conversation-with-senator-tina-smith-cicd

Neel Kashkari participates in fireside chat with U.S. Senator Tina Smith (MN) at CICD’s 10th Anniversary and Data Summit

October 8, 2025

Minneapolis, Minnesota

Neel Kashkari

Good afternoon. It is an honor to have with us today a distinguished public servant whose commitment to Indian country has been unwavering throughout her career. US Senator from Minnesota, Tina Smith, has long been a strong advocate for tribal sovereignty, for self-determination for tribes and for the federal government's trust responsibilities to native nations. Senator Smith has worked across the aisle on a wide range of issues critical to tribal communities. Throughout her service, she has emphasized that tribes themselves know how best to advance their own economic development. She is focused on addressing challenges and amplifying opportunities, whether in housing, health, education, infrastructure, or public safety. Senator Smith, on behalf of all of us here at the Minneapolis Fed and the Center for Indian Country Development, thank you for your time and your leadership. We are deeply grateful that you're joining us from Washington, your Washington DC office and for your steadfast dedication to advancing economic opportunity in Indian country. >> Well, Neil, thank you so much and thank you so much, Neil, and thanks to everybody there. I'm I'm sorry that we can't all be together in person, but I'm so grateful for the Minneapolis Fed and the work of the Center for Indian Country Development, and I'm really looking forward to this conversation. >> Thank you. you and we all we're also acutely aware of how much is going on in Washington DC. So it means even more to us that you're taking time now to be with us. We really appreciate it. When you joined the Senate, I know you actively sought to be a member of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs. Tell us about that. Why was that so important for you to serve on that committee? >> Yeah. Well, um, so first of all, I was of course very aware that there's a long tradition of Minnesota senators serving on, uh, the, um, Senate Indian Affairs Committee and, um, it was very important to me to be able to continue, uh, in that tradition. Um, I also felt when I came into this role that I wanted to go to some of the unexpected places to be in places and to be with people that um sometimes are pretty invisible in the halls of power here in Congress. And so, uh, being able to do that with Minnesota's native communities felt really important to me. not only the 11 sovereign tribal nations in Minnesota, which are so rich in so many ways, but also the um incredible urban indigenous community and the the the power and the richness of that community as well. And I often think that folks that are living in urban uh communities are also overlooked when it comes to um issues around um you know kind of Indian country uh writ large. And and then I would just also say that I have I have always approached this job as um an opportunity to build relationships and as um starting when I was chief of staff for the mayor of Minneapolis, but then especially when I was lieutenant governor, I had begun to develop relationships with Minnesota's tribal leaders that were very important to me. And this was such a great opportunity for me to deepen those relationships and and deepen our work together. So, I'm so glad. Um, it's in many ways has been some of the most fulfilling work that I've been able to do in the Senate. >> That's great. Thank you for sharing that. You know, both as Lieutenant Governor, which you just mentioned, and as a senator, you've worked closely with native leaders in Minnesota and nationally. I'm curious, are there specific things that you've learned from them that has influenced your approach to policym? Well, I mean, there's so many things it's hard to be able to put uh, you know, to kind of boil it down, but I mean, I think the first thing that I learned as I got to understand the 11 tribal nations in Minnesota, the um, Chipoa nations and then the Dakota nations was just understanding how different and how unique they are. And I think sometimes non-native people think of all native people as sort of the same in some way. Um and uh I became so interested in understanding the you know the histories and the cultures of of all of these um different places and and the different people. Of course many related in lots of very important ways but also quite different. Um and then I became um I I've learned so much from uh tribal leaders and their communities about like how they know what works in their own communities. Um whether you're talking about food sovereignty or u how you can use native traditions um to address the scourge of um addiction and mental health or uh how native communities are figuring out to how to reclaim their language and and what that actually looks like. the the entrepreneurialness of native people is um kind of a constant source of inspiration to me as I was just up in Red Lake as just one example last a couple weeks ago and um looking at how entrepreneurial the community is in terms of piecing together different sources of funding and different pathways to accomplish what it is they want to accomplish around um food and and building uh their bison herd was um I mean I you just learned so much from at every every single day. Yeah. Anneal, I wonder if you notice this because I know this is something that you work on a lot, but I think sometimes um impressions of native people and native communities are sort of a bit stuck in the past. It's like native people are frozen um in time as sort of a historical artifact and just kind of getting past that and understanding like the richness of now and what they are doing now is um I find it really inspiring. >> Absolutely. You know, my own experience in the last 10 years that I've been at the Minneapolis Fed and having visited many tribes in our region, just as you said, how varied they are. I come at it just, you know, you're you have a much broader portfolio. my colleagues and I are looking at through the lens of tribal economies and what their economic futures are. They're so varied. You know, some econ they just couldn't be more different in terms of their focus, the resources they have available. Even things like you mentioned what percentage of their members live on the reservation versus live in in uh urban centers. There's a lot there's a richness which creates opportunities and they can learn from each other. It also creates challenges because there's no one-sizefits-all solution that's going to work in every tribe. And so I think your points are they really resonated with me. >> Curious are are there any other I mean in your lifetime of work, you probably have hundreds of stories. Are there any other stories that stand out to you either as a senator or before that really uh capture some of the spirit of what you've personally seen on Indian country? Well, as you say, there are just there are just so many things, but you know, I will just mention one um you know, I think people maybe have some some people have some basic awareness that you know, the lands that were once um um native lands, the you know, the the the treaty territories and then the seated land is it's a very complicated patchwork of of of realities. And um and we also understand that there's just been a lot of lot of land that's been you know taken illegally from um tribes around the country including in um in Minnesota. And so one of the things that has been the most rewarding to me has been to work uh really closely with the Leech Lake um band to help them uh re um you know kind of re reather gather back together um um acres of land, many thousands of acres of land that were taken from them, you know, illegally in error um over over time and and being able to participate in that to be their advocate in Congress figure out how to build bipartisan support for that, watch them do the important work with the Forest Service and also with local land owners and with local elected officials to be able to get that done um was something that was really important. you know, the the term landback is of course a very powerful uh way of, you know, very powerful for native people and to be able to see that actually happening um in a very tangible way was a pretty incredible experience to be able to be a part of. You know, often when you're the senator and I suppose it's the same and your job is too, you know, there's been many many many years of work and you you know, the question is what is the piece that you can do during the time that you're serving? And I felt really blessed to be able to be at Leech Lake to help um them with brothers and sisters from all over the country come to be able to celebrate uh that you know reclamation of that land was really was really incredible. That >> that's great. You know, you touched on something um which is that struck me in this in this age of extreme partisanship that I feel like we're living in right now. oftentimes issues around Indian countries, my experience has been they're not really partisan issues that you are seeing Republicans and Democrats come together from the region. I'm just curious if there's anything there that you could share about your own experience in the Senate. >> One of the most rewarding things um about being a senator working on um native issues is that it has traditionally been quite bipartisan. The Senate Indian Affairs Committee itself has a history of comedy and of respecting the minority when you're in the majority because you know it's going to flip back and forth is very um it's very in uh you know um deep into the culture of the committee. Many native issues um are actually quite parochial in the sense that they are um very specific to a particular tribe and their water rights or their land rights. And so there that means that there's a kind of a difference to the you know local leaders and the local understanding and there's really strong support um uh for native issues on on both sides of the aisle. And so I I think you're absolutely right. It makes the work a lot less, you know, a lot less hostile than some of the some of the work that we're doing. And and also let's be honest, I mean, you know, both Democrats and Republican administrations have to do much better when it comes to, for example, really understanding the principles of self-governance. And in the Biden administration, though, we were so blessed to have Secretary Holland, you know, blazing that trail, there were still many parts of the administration where we struggled to get kind of a deep understanding of what self-governance really meant, how you could use 638 authority in new ways. Um, and so if you know what I mean, you know, everybody has a lot to learn. You there's a you bring a certain humility to this work. Um, which also makes it less partisan. >> That's great. Thank you. And I'm curious as you think about the future of Indian country and economic opportunity. Are there certain key opportunities andor challenges that stand out for you that we should be thinking about as we think about the future of our own work? Mhm. Well, I I feel quite sure that um you know, those of you at the Center for Indian Country Development are thinking about these issues. I bet we're very aligned on this. I know we are. Um I think the first is the deep need for access to capital and lending um um in Indian country. And uh this is something that I know that you have worked on a lot and I think that it is it's it's so important um it's why for example it's so important to continue our work to support native CDFIs but there are many ways um that that we need to do that maybe we'll talk a little bit more about that later. Um the second thing and I know I I hope we'll talk about this in more detail too is just the deep issue of of housing needs and the um the you know there's great examples of innovation um on tribal land around building new housing and addressing the severe housing shortage but I see that as a big economic a huge economic driver. And then the third thing is just the opportunity to really take full advantage of what um what self-governance authority can look like and that that is an economic development opportunity, it's a health opportunity, it's an education opportunity, uh um all of those things. So, um those are three things that come to my mind as we think about like where where we can kind of build on strength. Uh those are those are great and they absolutely resonate with me and with my I know with my colleagues here at the Minneapolis Fed the housing one and just in particular which I know you've done a lot of work on going back a decade or well 15 years uh we've been working on these types of issues to try to understand what are the barriers uh and there are many you mentioned capital is a barrier obviously the complexities around trust land and lending against trust land and so we're really proud of some of the work that we've done over the decade or more to try to create a toolkit that can enable tribes and their members to get access to capital to try to close some of these gaps. But there are I mean obviously the gaps remain there are still many many barriers but hopefully we are making a contribution in reducing some of those barriers so that people have choices uh choices of where they live, choices of where they work and and I know you're aligned on that. I think it's so important and you know I also think that um I I think that uh it's important for you know broadly speaking around the state it's really important for economic development efforts to remember to include the um entrepreneurs that are working primarily um on uh tribal land and you know I will I will never forget being up in the Biji area and having a great meeting with folks there around um kind uh you know incubator uh new entrepreneurial ideas and um and and this great conversation uh this was quite a few years ago I wouldn't make this mistake now we had neglected to invite anybody from Red Lake Nation to come to this discussion which was a huge oversight on our part and I was quite humbled by that and um of course but there was chair there to make sure that the voice of Red Lake Nation businesses and entrepreneurs were heard and So, it's always a reminder to me of how um there's economic opportunity within tribes, but that we all need to do a much better job of of like um including uh tribal entrepreneurs and businesses um in the broader efforts of the state. >> Absolutely. In fact, for us at the Minneapolis Fed, uh sometimes we have, you know, meetings that are non-tribal businesses and then we've got meetings that are tribal businesses and then we ask ourselves, well, why are we making the segmentation? Why aren't we just have having meetings of businesses and all local businesses are invited and so uh it's I just think it's a reminder for all of us. We want to make sure that those voices are heard because there's a lot that we can learn from them relevant to their own tribes and economic futures but I think relevant to the economy more broadly. >> Yep. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. >> As you know Senator census data and other data sources frequently lack data on Indian country. Now mostly it's due it's not due to lack of uh intention but it's usually due to insufficient sample sizes and we're trying to close that gap here at our center for Indian country development. I'm curious if there's anything you can share about your own experience why it's important to get access to high quality accurate data. You know you're a policy maker you're drafting legislation you're shaping it. Are there any examples where good data has either made a really big difference or the lack of good data has been a real barrier to you as a policy maker? Yeah. Well, I first of all, I really really appreciate the work that you all are doing um um at MCICD around this and I understand I haven't had a chance to look at it yet that you've just recently released this new um reend report on the reending pilot program I think with for um native CDFIS which is a great example of like okay let's get some data and let's really understand what's working from this but I mean across the board this is a challenge uh during the pandemic we struggled so much with um a lack a lack of good data about what was really happening on the ground. And it's also interesting as you think about this how um we the federal government needs to be much more adept at figuring out how to provide data uh to tribal um entities that need that information in order to be able to make good decisions in order to be able to you know off some in some cases apply for grants. We struggled a lot with this also during the pandemic when um tribal um epidemiology centers were not afforded the same access to information and data as um you know public health departments in other um you know in other communities. And that was a real problem for them as they were trying to figure out what to do to help take care of their um of their people. And yet, of course, we saw during the pandemic that when tribes had the resources to um put together strong um vac vaccination programs and other public health strategies um that they were much more successful um when they were able to run that based on what they knew about their own communities. So, um I'm kind of an oldfashioned girl. I believe that we should follow the facts and the science and the data where we have it and we should make sure that we have the best available data and I'm just grateful for the work that you're doing to make that um more of a reality for us. >> That's a great example. I didn't by the way I didn't know that fact about that some tribes didn't have access to the public health data. I did observe, we did observe that there was great variation about how various tribes responded to the pandemic and some were very effective in getting to their members very quickly, establishing protocols that were then followed and were really leading the way in making sure that they could protect their members while also preserving their economy. So, I thought that that's a great example. Here at the Fed, as you know, we stood up several emergency lending programs in partnership with the US Treasury Department and we also in many cases were blind. We didn't have the data that we needed to be able to structure those programs quickly to get even if programs were designed for tribal let's say CDFIs or tribal small businesses to get access to it. A lot of times those programs weren't necessarily optimally designed not because we didn't want to but because we didn't have enough information to be able to understand exactly how to design those. And so that's what opened our eyes to this acute data shortage that we faced. And that's what led us to say we need to double down and really invest in trying to close those data gaps so that we can fulfill our obligations that Congress has given us. >> Yeah, I love that. I think that's so great. And we um you know, if you really can see I mean my view is that if you really can truly see and understand the disparities that exist because of lack of investment then you are just in a better position to be able to get after it. And uh that is I mean it's so much the case when it comes to health care just as one example. >> So let's uh we only have a few minutes left. Senator this is this has been a great discussion. Let's go back to housing for a moment. You know everywhere I travel in our region on not just tribes across the state of Minnesota across our region housing is a is a challenge. Housing supply housing affordability. It's a local issue. It's a state issue. It's also a national issue. Uh it's not a partisan issue. It's blue state, red state, purple state. It's across the board. I'm just curious given your extensive experience working on housing issues. Are there any things top of mind that you think of related in the Indian country or just across the state of Minnesota that we should all be focused on? >> Yeah. Well, so I mean I, you know, I always start from the core value that everybody deserves a safe, decent, affordable place to live and that if that you don't have that in your life, then probably nothing else in your life is going to work. And so it is really to me um and I I mean I've learned this from so many you know in so many different communities. It really is the foundation. And you know, yet we also know that the severe housing shortage that exists broadly in this country um is often particularly acute in rural communities and especially acute in tribal um you know tribal lands where it is you know particularly difficult to work through some of the challenges around um getting a mortgage and and building a home. And um the there's also such an ethic in native communities about um this is a great example actually of the importance of data. How you measure homelessness, for example, on tribal lands might be quite different because homelessness is going to um people living without a home is going to be you're you're going to see it in extreme overcrowding rather than folks actually living outside which you just are not going to see as much because of the culture of of you know many native communities. And so that's a great example of how you need to be able to measure in the right way. I worked hard on that with the department of housing and urban development to try to improve that. Um so getting I think I think that um that housing supply issue figuring out the um figuring out the uh the um the financing and the roles that native CDFIs can play here is really important. And then I also just want to highlight some of the great innovation that's happening. For example, um in Lower Sue, the work that Lower Sue is doing with um developing um hemp crete as a construction model and and also as a business model to be able to sell um and be a revenue generator is just another I love that example of of kind of entrepreneurship um for those folks um at Lower Sue. That that's great. And obviously that's a good example of something where it can help their own local economy, but it also could be serving a broader market. Yeah. Around the country, potentially around the world. And so that's uh >> it's it's good for everybody. Well, Senator, I think we could we could go on for another 30 minutes easily, but I know you have a busy agenda in Washington, DC, and I just wanted to say thank you again for joining us today, but also thank you again for your uh lifetime of leadership on these issues, and I look forward to working with you uh into the future to try to bring more economic development to Indian country and partnership with us here at the Minneapolis Fed. So, thank you. >> Thank you so much. It's great to be great to do this with you and uh and take good care. I'll see you soon. >> Okay. See you. Bye-bye.