https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/qa-with-neel-kashkari-in-rapid-city-south-dakota

Q&A with Neel Kashkari in Rapid City, South Dakota

October 16, 2025

Rapid City, South Dakota

Neel Kashkari

Uh, welcome to our event everybody. We appreciate this. Uh, my name is Tom Johnson. I'm the president and CEO of a little group called Elevate Rapid City. Uh, we're the economic development organization, chamber of commerce, business incubator, development group. We do all kinds of stuff. Thanks for being here today. One of the things we like to do is have events and have conversations around uh, economic issues. Uh, we're delighted here today. This is a real exciting time for us. Uh we have our good friend with the Federal Reserve uh Neil Qashqari to my right. He's the president and of the Federal Reserve for the Bank of Minneapolis uh which handles the Rapid City area. As an introduction for the rest of our guests, the Federal Reserve Bank uh Minneapolis is one of the Fed's 12 banks that you have across the country. Uh the Minneapolis Fed includes a district that's that's 12 states and it's it's wide. Uh it's Minnesota, North and South Dakota. North Dakota, they can be take them or leave them. Uh Montana, northwestern Wisconsin, uh and the upper peninsula of Michigan. So, it's a wide and large geographic area. Neil serves uh not only as president of the Federal Reserve for Minneapolis, uh but also a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which if you've read anything about the Feds, you know they set uh a lot of our nation's monetary policy. Uh I didn't know this about Neil before uh meeting the group uh today, but I I figured somebody must have been around during the 28 2008 crisis and Neil certainly was uh before joining the Ved. He had a number of public roles uh but he also served as the assistant secretary of the treasury during that financial crisis. So it was good to have him around for someone to to help figure out what to do there. He oversaw the troubled asset relief uh program. In addition to all of that, uh he also has some time to be uh a husband and a father of two young children. Uh Neil, before we get into some of the questions, I know you are going to give some comments and help us participate in some of the stuff Eric talked about. So, I'm going to go ahead and turn it over to you. >> Thank you. Uh it's great to be back in South Dakota. Uh this is my 10th year at the Minneapolis Fed and every year I try to visit South Dakota at least once. I've been in Rapid City before. I always try to visit different parts of the state because it's a big state and a a diverse geography and a diverse economy. We're here to learn from all of you. We're here to I'm here to answer questions, but also to hear from you about what's happening here in our local economy. Our jobs at the Minneapolis Fed are literally to represent all of you in our nation's monetary policymaking process. So every six weeks I go back to Washington DC and part of what I'm doing in those discussions is talking about what's happening here in our regional economy. Now we cannot set a different monetary policy which means a different interest rate environment for South Dakota and for California and for New York. It's all the same dollar. So we try to set interest rates for what's right for the US economy as a whole. But my job is to make sure that this part of America is part of that deliberative process. So the more you can share with me and my colleagues about what you're seeing on the ground here, the better informed we're going to be when I go back to Washington DC in a couple weeks. So that's why I always love visits like this because it gives us a chance to hear firsthand from people. We've had a couple days of meetings. By the way, we're here with the board of directors of the Minneapolis Fed and a number of our senior leaders in our bank. Each of the 12 reserve banks has a board of directors that is made up of local business and civic leaders. We we draw people from across our region, different sectors of the economy are represented and they help us to keep our fingers on the pulse of what's happening and every year or two our board members come with us on a regional visit like this and so we're pleased to have all of them here with us today. Now, before I get to the poll, um we've obviously all been experiencing high inflation the last several years. It's our job to get inflation all the way back down to what we call our 2% target. We were making good progress up until the beginning of this year and then tariffs threw a curveball at us. So, what happens when tariffs hit the economy? The prices of goods that we buy from abroad go up. So, we kind of know that. That's that's math. You can see that if a tariff gets applied to a good that the price of that good is going to be somewhat higher. But how high is it going to be? And is that going to lead to a permanent increase of prices or is it just a one-time event? And is it just goods prices or does it spill over to other sectors of the economy? The short answer is so far it's too soon to know for sure. We are still starting to see we're seeing the effects of tariffs on the prices of goods that we buy from abroad. Those prices are going up. But are they going to keep going up or are they going to level off and are they going to level off and is that inflation going to trend down? We don't know yet. My observation has been that the impact of tariffs on the economy is taking longer to be felt than I would have guessed when they were announced. Part of the reason it's taking longer is that business has built up a lot of inventory at the beginning of the year. And so they've been working that inventory down, not having to pass all the costs on to their customers. But as that inventory gets worked down or they have to replenish it, they're telling us, hey, at the beginning of the year, we might start to see more of a tariff effect on prices. So we'll see. Services inflation has kind of leveled off. And that's, you know, I would expect it to continue to trend down, but is it possible that goods inflation is spilling over to services? It's possible. These are some of the things that we're looking at. At the same time, the job market seems like it's slowing down. If you look at job growth nationally, last year, many, many more jobs were being created every month. It's really slowed down a lot right now. Now, partially that has slowed down because we have dramatically fewer immigrants coming into this country. So, fewer people needing jobs, but it's also slowed down, we think, because of underlying demand for workers has slowed down. So, in the last two days, a lot of the discussions we've been having with businesses around this uh Rapid City area are what's happening to your prices? Are you feeling the effects of inflation? And what about your demand for workers? Are you able to find the workers that you need? Kind of overall what I've been hearing from businesses is that, hey, they're still feeling the effects of inflation. more effects of inflation are likely still to come, but the demand for labor seems like it's softening a little bit relative to where it was a year or two ago. And that's I mean that's an overly simplified view, but that's kind of what I heard in our couple days of meetings. So, I'm curious when we're going to ask you some of these same questions. I mean, give us your best answer because that's going to help inform us about what's happening here on the ground. Last thing I will say is that the economy usually sends us we get a lot of data and the economy usually sends us confusing signals. Some data says the economy is really hot, some data says the economy is cool and then with conversations like this we try to figure out well what's really happening underlying the the data. It's a little bit more challenging now because we don't even get all the data that we normally get. As you know the government is shut down. So some of the core data that we rely on to read the economy, we're not getting right now. And that makes it even more challenging to read some of these underlying signals. So I really appreciate you sharing your experiences with us. It'll help us become smarter. So with that, let's go to the first question on the screen. So which of the following best describes you, an employer, worker, student? You're looking for work or voluntarily not working or retired. Okay. Pretty good mix. Oops. Let's go back. Pretty good mix of uh employers, students, and then the bulk of whom are workers with a with a handful of retired folks. Great. Let's go to the next question. How would you describe the local economy today compared to the same period last year? Everything from much stronger to much weaker. So it looks like it's glitching a little bit. The letters show up and then they disappear. So it's A for much stronger, B, C, D, and E. So if you think the economy is much stronger, just uh send the letter A or the letter B, C,DE, E according to how you feel about the economy. >> So this this will be the first time this has not worked, >> right? >> My overview was uh what I'm hearing here in Rapid City is that overall the economy seems like it's doing pretty well. Most folks have said that they've more concerned about inflation, that they're concerned that inflation is still a problem going forward, and that businesses are finding it somewhat easier to find the workers that they need, but it's still it's still a challenge for businesses. I mean, South Dakota, I know this having been here now for 10 years, South Dakota always has uh a tight labor market, and so people are pointing it's working now. I don't know how people pre-answered this question without having seen it. Um, all right. Let's just NYX it. Let's forget it. Let's go on to the conversation. I have I have less confidence now in this data than I otherwise would have had. >> Neil, I was going to say in Rapid City, we can kind of see the future. So, that's probably what's happening, I guess. >> Uh, okay. Well, Neil, thanks for those remarks. Uh, we've got uh I believe we have a mic out there somewhere. Is that correct? Uh, so we are going to open up the uh audience for audience questions. So, we have Eric has a mic. So, if you have a question, raise your hand. We'll get the mic to you. But, but I have some questions, too, Neil. Let me just get the one out of the way that I think is one that everybody probably is thinking. You know, it's been in the history of this country a little bit of sport uh for the current administration at the executive level to beat up the Fed or or criticize the Fed, you know, because uh their policies and your policies uh interact with each other in interesting ways. Uh recently though, that has been uh given a little bit of a an uptick in terms of uh some of the criticism. I think it's opened up conversations about the Federal Reserve and their independence. I was kind of curious maybe if you could talk a little bit about and I certainly uh feel this way. Uh the Fed was set up to be independent of any single body uh because you have a role uh around uh full employment and stable pricing and that does not enter the political realm. So you guys are an a-olitical body that was the whole purpose of it. Could you talk a little bit about that and you know some of the uh the ways that you maybe uh try to maybe not read the newspaper and and get influenced by what's happening on social media? >> Sure. So over the last 40 or 50 years a consensus has developed excuse me around the world in advanced economies everywhere that keeping monetary policy in the central bank independent of short-term political considerations leads to better long-term outcomes for the economy. So, let me first back up for a second. What is monetary policy versus fiscal policy? So, monetary policy is we set interest rates up and down to try to achieve the goals that Congress has given us. Congress said achieve stable prices, what we've defined as 2% inflation and maximum employment. And we move interest rates up and down to try to achieve both of those two things at the same time. Contrast that with fiscal policy. Fiscal policy is your elected representatives decide how much to tax you and me. Income taxes, sales taxes, capital gains taxes, and then what to spend that on. Defense, education, health care, roads, things like that. Those are inherently political decisions. So that's the differentiation between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Well, around the world, people have realized advanced economies have realized if we keep monetary policy out of short-term political considerations, we end up with better long-term outcomes for the economy. So, why is that? A big factor of what determines long-term economic performance is can we keep people's expectations about future inflation in check? Like if you all lose confidence, you think, "Hey, the Fed is going to make short-term political game decisions, then that will probably mean that inflation is going to be higher in the future." And then you're going to go to your boss and you're going to say, "Hey, I need a raise to keep my family our standard of living where it is because high inflation is coming in the future." And then your boss is going to say, "Well, we need to raise our prices for our customers because we're now having to pay our employees more." So if everyone believes that high inflation is coming in the future, it becomes a self-fulfilling cycle and that's why expectations of the future are really important and the best way to control those expectations is to keep the central bank independent. So many politicians of both parties have criticized the Fed over time. They don't like our short-term decisions. But I can tell you that my colleagues and I are doing our very best to look at the best data we can get our hands on, have conversations like this to make the best decisions we can to achieve the goals that Congress has assigned us, keeping short-term political considerations out of it. And that's all I can say to you is that we're doing our best to make the best decisions we can given the imperfect data that we have and the complicated economy that we face. Thanks, Neil. Um, got lot of lots of questions I could ask you, but let's just see what the audience wants to start asking now. Anybody have any questions for Neil right out of the gate and we'll get the microphone to you. >> Oh, I'm right at the front here. Let a microphone come to you because we're live streaming this and let folks online hear your question. >> Hello and uh thank you for putting on this event. Uh, my name is Matthew Vogle. I serve as a policy lead for the National Congress of American Indians. Uh, NCI serves as one of the oldest, largest, most representative uh, nonprofits, advocacy groups for Indian country across the nation. Uh, not really a comment, more or not really a question, more of a comment. Um, and kudos to uh, the Minneapolis branch for uh, Center for Indian Country Development. Uh, CICD has been a long partner with NCI and has done some great work, great products. Uh, two products that I'd like to highlight for you or to see maybe um, increased in the future. Uh the first one is the uh roadmap for home ownership. Uh that was a product that was put out in 2018 and has served as an excellent uh resource for tribal nations uh community development, financial sorry CDFIs and um community partners. Uh so that helps tribal leaders and all those various groups uh navigate the complex process of home home ownership on trust and reservation lands. uh we'd like to see that um you know any efforts to advocate for increasing that or increasing any opportunities for future collaboration to provide any updates. 2018 is not that long ago but but it has gained some years. Uh the second uh thing I'd like to mention is in 2019 uh there was an article that was put out um by CICD on the shutdown impacts on in Indian country and I just like to say that these resources are hugely important especially for the work that I do in the national level uh where we educate Congress on the importance of uh government employment especially on reservations. The article cites 12 and a half% of government employees are are employed on reservations with the anecdote that larger tribes um such as those in the Great Plains comprise a higher number more like 25 to 30% such as Navajo Nation as cited in the article. Um those resources, those products that you're putting out there through CICD are so important and we would like to see those um continued u and would like to support those in any way. The last one is just a recommendation. Um, so the hardest thing in Indian country is finding capital, access to capital, and anything the Minneapolis Fed can do to increase that awareness to lenders, to the lending community on the great opportunities that exist in Indian country. Um, especially with the increased housing crisis in Indian country. Um, so any efforts we can see to promote that would be great. And lastly, I'll leave you with um uh the stakeholder events that used to be held in the past. Those have been excellent. And I think the point with that is when you bring the right people to the table, viable solutions will emerge. And so, uh just want to say this is more just a thank you to the Minneapolis Fed and the CI/CD program. So, thank you so much. >> Neil, do you want to make any comments? >> Yeah, I just want to say thank you for your comment. Really appreciate it. The gentleman is talking about our center for Indian country development. We have a research center at the Minneapolis Fed focusing on understanding tribal economies, collecting data to equip those tribal nations and other policy makers with the data that they need to design effective solutions. And so and and we have a strong partnership with your organization going back many years, which I know. So I appreciate you saying that. I'll just give one shout out uh to where's Lakota? There's Lakota. Lakota's on our board of directors and she runs a CDFI focusing uh among other things on native communities. So, Lakota actually organized a meeting for us today focusing on small tribal businesses getting access to capital, some of the challenges that they've had and how they've bridged those gaps. And so, all of your comments resonate and I really appreciate it. Thank you. >> Uh, raise your hands if you got questions. We'll get you. Marty, yes, there's a mic coming to you on your right >> or your left. My right, sorry. >> Good afternoon. I'm Marty Herman. I'm with Security First Bank. We are a family-owned community bank with uh Nexus in Nebraska and in South Dakota. Would you comment on community banking in general? Um and particularly maybe on the the the subject of how many fewer community banks there are today than when you were here 10 years ago and what that impact might be on our country. >> Well, this trend that um you asked about, if you look at the number of banks in America, it continues to shrink. I mean, I think during '08, if I recall, there were something like 8,000 banks in America, and I'm going to guess now it's four or 5,000. It just continues to trend down. Part of the reason for all of that consolidation, uh, some of some of folks point to regulatory burdens, so complying with regulations is expensive and you need to get bigger to be able to afford to comply with the regulations. Part of it is technology. People, you know, customers, how much of my banking do I do on my phone now? It's expensive to be able to support those applications to be able to provide that. That's costly and you need to end up having a bigger and bigger bag to be able to support that. So part of it is what I would call kind of the gravity of the evolving economy that we live in. But there are costs to it. Meaning uh it was an eye openening experience for me. When COVID hit, the US Congress allocated hundreds of billions of dollars through the PPP program, the paycheck protection program. We heard from so many businesses that said that they had had long-standing relationships with giant national banks who wouldn't even return their calls when they said, "We need to get access to," you had to get access to the PPP money through a bank. You had to apply through a bank. And the big banks were overwhelmed or couldn't keep up with it. So they went to a local community bank and were able to establish a relationship, open an account, apply for the funding, get the funding before they even got their calls returned from the big national bank. So that was an then those stories were widespread across the country. So that was an eye-opening experience for me about hey community banks do play a unique role in our communities all across the country that is not easily replicated by the big giant banks. And so I I see a tension. On one hand, I say, hey, they're providing a really important service in our communities. On the other hand, the economics are challenging to to stay small. And so my guess is you're going to continue to see consolidation, but hopefully it's local consolidation of of a small, you know, a few community banks getting together rather than all being hoovered up by the big giant banks. So you can still maintain some local footprint. But I know it's a challenge. They still other questions the audience? Well, while they're thinking, I'll ask a question since Oh, there I knew Mr. Partridge would be good for a question or two. There he is in the audience. Uh getting him a mic on your left, Jeff. I think it's coming. Neil, welcome to South Dakota. And we have a fiscal note for you. And that is we can fix that income tax of Minnesota problem for you by moving your office to Sou Falls if you want. So, be more centralized. It'll be more centralized, I think, for you actually too. >> My question has to do with um employment goals of the Fed. You know, we talk about price stability and you know, the inflation piece. We talk about interest rates quite a bit and I know you talk about, you know, the employment and and and you know, jobs and things like that. Should the Fed change its its employment goals and some of the ways that it looks at our labor market and employment and maybe sacrifice a little bit of the price stability conversation for greater employment and and more knowledgeable workforce and kind of advancing the the economy you know where 6% of GDP is our egg but should we go you know look at more in our region um you know things like that so that's kind of my question for you >> well it's challenging you know if we sacrificed inflation to say we're going to have a boost of employment. It might feel good in the short run that we'd get a boost of employment in the short run, but it is not obvious to me that long run the economy would be better off. I think that if we effectively said we're really going to prioritize the labor market and not worry that much about inflation, that that could lead to a much worse outcome, I think, over time. You know, if you go back to the 1970s when the US had very very high inflation, I think most people would say that was not a good time for workers at all. Uh, you know, one of our uh one of our labor leaders that we talked to quite a bit shared an anecdote with me during the really high inflation period after COVID and the anecdote was inflation is worse than a recession. And I was confused by that. I said, how can inflation be worse than a recession? In a recession, you lose your job. Inflation, yeah, prices are higher, but at least you still have a job. And what this leader said to me was, "Yeah, but inflation, her members know how to deal with the recession. If I lost my job, I could lean on my my spouse or my mom or dad or my sister or my brother to help me get through the tough times. But inflation affects everybody. who do I lean on that is not equally suffering from the high inflation period? And so it's a long answer to your question, which is I think that if we said we're not going to focus so much on inflation, we're just going to focus on the labor market. I think the benefits would be short-term. I think the cost would be born long-term for all of us. Neil, basically, you just said it's it's easier to go move back in with your parents than it is to go buy uh groceries for over a period of time, right? Uh I see I see a question over here. Yeah, if we're uh the mic's coming behind you, sir, to your left. >> Uh uh Mark Cernicki from Old Hall Green Wealth. Um question concerns um private credit. It's been an interesting week. We've had Jamie Diamond talk about the cockroaches and private credit and then the leader of Blue Al said you should look at your cockroaches, Jamie, not mine. I think the next day the FT then had an article about a really large asset manager pushing for putting private credit in 401k plans. And then obviously today you guys are pretty familiar with what happened to a couple of the regional banks. So the question is I kind of understand how the Fed can kind of really peer into banks, right? How do you look into the private credit, private equity people, right? And do you worry about that risk? And the second is really relates to kind of my role as an adviser is like the suitability of having private credit in a 401k plan where the employee ultimately bears the risk as opposed to a pension where the employer bears the risk. So if you can comment on those two, I appreciate it. Thank you. Yeah, it's hard. Um, we do have a lot more visibility into what's happening in banks that we supervise. And even though we have that visibility, we're not perfect at supervising banks, but we, as you said, we have very little visibility into what's happening into some of these private vehicles like private credit vehicles. Now, we've looked at it and I've looked at it. There are some comforting components of this, which is generally speaking, private credit vehicles have much lower leverage than say a bank. Say a bank has levered 10 to one. Most private credit vehicles that I've had exposure to are levered say one to one. So generally leverage is a source of financial instability. If something goes bad and you're levered 10 to one, you can have a much worse outcome than if you're only levered one. A second somewhat comforting factor is, as you know, banks tend to be funded overnight. You know, the deposits can walk out the door the next day. Most private credit vehicles are funded with longer term liquidity. So less of what we call maturity transformation, overnight funding transferring uh transforming into long-term loans. So there are some reasons why private credit doesn't give me as much concern. The part where there is concern is we have less visibility into what these loans are. They generally have much weaker covenants and scrutiny and diligence that goes into them. They're made very quickly. Banks tell me, "Oh yeah, we lost out this deal. It would have taken us three months to underwrite it." their private credit came along and did it in two days. Um, and then what are the connectivities between all of these different funding vehicles? Banks are funding each other in different parts of the capital structure. Generally, that complexity uh gets exposed when there's a downturn and all of a sudden people you didn't think were at risk end up being at risk. And so, um, it's something that we're watching very carefully. I don't have an overarching view that this is good or this is bad, but it bears watching. And I like you, I'm cautious about saying this is suitable for a 401k. I mean, if a sophisticated investor loses a bunch of money because they wanted to speculate, fine. You know, it's another thing if rank and file employees who are not as sophisticated are now exposed to things that they didn't really understand. That gives me some pause. >> Other questions? I see a >> U. Yeah, we'll get a mic to you. Oh, we got a question over here. So there. Let's Let's go ahead. Yeah. >> Um good afternoon, Neil. And I just want to say thank you for being here. Thank you to um Lakota Vogle at four vans for bringing you here and I'm sure um uh making sure you understand the needs in Indian country. So I just wanted to follow up. This is in the form of of a question. I tend to ramble and so um I did want to just provide you a little context. Um Sandy Gerber, Casey, I don't know if you remember Sandy. Um probably 15 years ago, Sandy Gerber worked for the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. And that long ago, we were trying to bring uh bankers together um to have what we called um lenders roundts, opportunities to meet with native CDFIs to encourage investment. Um and we see and we're still not there. In fact, we've gone backwards, right, in 15 years. So CRA in my opinion isn't working. Um but I did make it into a question. So um the um I'm Tony Brunch from Lakota Funds serving the Pine Ridge Reservation, Pine Ridge and Rosebud. We were uh the first native CDFI. So we've been around a long time. Um, native CDFIS often serve as the primary source of credit in our communities. As I'm sure you're aware, the challenges native CDFIs face in accessing affordable capital, really any capital, reflect a broader gap across Indian country that limits economic growth and opportunity for many tribal communities. We've put a lot of time and energy into leveraging CRA related investments, but those initiatives have yet to deliver the consistent affordable capital that native CDFI so urgently need. Given the Federal Reserve's critical role in shaping the availability and cost of credit, how can the Minneapolis Federal Reserve better approach the challenge of expanding access to affordable long-term capital for native CDFIs? >> I'd say there's thanks for your question. I'd say there's two two things that we can do. One is which you mentioned, which is that we have the power to convene. we can bring in together stakeholders who are interested in a given topic to make some of these connections which we've done in the past we continue to do. The other thing that we are able to do is do research to identify hey here are the gaps here are potential solutions here are case studies of what has worked. What we cannot do is we are not in charge of fiscal policy. So ultimately it is up to the federal government or state governments or local governments to decide that they want to allocate taxpayer dollars to support a given sector or a given market. That is completely outside of the Fed's control, the Fed's mandate. All we can do is bring people together and do nonpartisan dispassionate highquality research to identify potential uh challenges and potential solutions. And that's one of the things that our center for Indian country development, both of those things are things our center for Indian country development are trying to do. >> I saw a question over there. We'll go over there and then so go here and then we'll go there. I see you, sir. I got you. We'll get you. But we're going to start over here with I think Nick's got a question, right? Yeah, Nick. >> Nick Tilson. Uh my name is Nick Tilson. I'm Lakota. I'm the founder and CEO of NDN Collective. Uh thank you for coming to our homelands and for being here. Want to acknowledge uh Tonnie Brunch and Lakota Mau who are champions in this space um and leaders of our community and colleagues. Um the biggest you know in this moment in history when we're watching what's happening politically you know I keep saying like the rise of authoritarianism in this country uh is probably one of the biggest threats to to tribal economies and to tribal sovereignty and to our treaty treaty and human rights uh than anything that's that has ever existed. And I appreciate that that the institution of the Federal Reserve is set up to be separate. And I and I appreciate the analysis of the difference between fiscal policy, monetary policy. But when we get down to brass tax in this situation, we're also dealing with a regime that is is violating its own laws. And we're pretty familiar with this this experience, you know, in in the United States as it relates to indigenous people because the constitution we have been part of the experience where the the implementation of the constitution as it relates to indigenous people in this country has been selective selective prosecution apply the laws you know in a certain way as it relates to Indian people as it relates to other people. So my biggest thing is what does this look like in implementation? What does it look like for the Federal Reserve to stand up to protect the the separation and protection? And what is the Federal Reserve actively doing to the current regime to protect that? Because I do think that the future of the Federal Reserve is at risk given given the political situation that we find ourselves in. And so I'd like to hear a little bit more about what you're doing actively to protect that and how are those conversations happening because I know they're happening at other places, you know, throughout the federal government. Thank you. >> Well, I'll tell you what I tell our staffs internally. The best thing we can do when we face political uncertainty is to do our jobs to the best of our ability, leaving politics at the door. And the more we do that and the more we are seen and acknowledged to be doing that, the more credibility I believe we will have with the American people that we are ultimately accountable to. We were we were created the Federal Reserve was created by Congress in 1913. We are ultimately accountable to Congress. You know, we the Federal Reserve is the nation's third attempt at a central bank. There was the first bank of the United States created by Alexander Hamilton. lasted about 20 years. There was a second bank in the United States lasted about 20 years. Then there were a bunch of banking crises in the late 1800s and a big one, the banking panic of 1907. And then Congress said, "Well, gee, I guess we do need a central bank." But they didn't want it to be housed in Washington DC and under the thumb of political leaders. So they created 12 independent Federal Reserve banks and spread them around the country to distribute the power. So they had independence in their very mindset as they crafted this institution. So I do I do believe very soundly that leaders on both sides of the aisle believe in an independent central bank for the reasons that I said and the best thing we can do to continue to earn their support is to demonstrate that we're leaving politics to them and that we're making the best monetary policy decisions we can based on the data the best data that we have available to us. And then ultimately some of these things are some of these questions are going to the Supreme Court and then the Supreme Court is weighing in. I will say this, I don't know how closely you follow the Supreme Court in May. The United States Supreme Court said, "Hey, there are all these rulings that they're making, but the Federal Reserve is different for the following reasons." And the Federal Reserve has had a unique place in American history. And I was pleased to see them reach that conclusion. And I hope that they continue to have that view. Neil, just to add to that, I I know that groups like ours, 501c6s and economic development groups across the country, chambers, we have contacted our federal delegation and we have made it as clear as we can that we believe in independent Federal Reserve and uh and that that we believe that it needs to continue to do that. So, I know there are a lot of groups trying to advocate that too as well. So, so thanks for that answer. Sir, we're going to get to you now. >> Mr. Qashqari, Richard Walstrom, Rapid City, thank you for being here. It's uh I I hope that your fellow uh Federal Reserve presidents in the other districts do the same because it's so valuable. My question is about the the buzzword of 2025, AI. How do you see AI affecting the general economy from employment to economic competition and so forth five years from now, 10 years from now? It's going to transform some things for us. What are what are you seeing and what is what is the Fed talking about at at your level? >> Well, I'm long-term bullish on AI that AI can do a lot of good for our economy, can boost our productivity over the long term. I use it just to search basic, you know, I I give how do I how do I replace the cartridge in my shower? Uh it's an active AI discussion that I'm having. >> Neil, I thought you would type into chat GDP, should we lower interest rates next quarter? >> Uh much more hands, much more detail than that. Um you know, is this the right cartridge for my shower in in my in my bathroom? Uh so I use it and it's helping me a lot personally. Um, I'm long-term bullish. I'm short-term skeptical that it's going to lead to these widespread layoffs that the bulls are talking about. Generally speaking, when fundamental new technologies get developed, it takes decades for them to get woven into the fabric of society. That was true for electricity. That was true for the internal combustion engine. That was true for the integrated circuit. And those are all totally transformational technologies. I bet that's going to be true for AI as well. And I always remind people, five years ago, the best experts in Silicon Valley told us that self-driving cars were right around the corner and all the long haul truck drivers were about to be unemployed. That's not been remotely true. I do think I do think self-driving cars are going to be are going to come, but it's just taking a lot longer than people think. And so I'm bullish. I think there's going to be a role for workers. Uh the US economy has gone through transformations in the past with technology. Jobs have changed. the natures of jobs have changed. Uh but it usually takes a lot longer than people think. So I'm bullish in the long term. I'm not that alarmed in the short term. Uh and if we can really boost our productivity over the long term, that's great. I mean that that grows the pie for everyone. Um and I'm excited about that. The last thing I'll say is, you know, the US economy, we have all these challenges that we all we we're really good at identifying our problems, but don't forget our economy is far and away the strongest major economy in the world. And it's not even close. It is not even close our competitive strength economically to every other major economy in the world. And AI is now boosting that even more. When I talk to peers of other central banks, if you take Europe as an example, this is a generalization, but as a generalization, Europe's approach to AI is how do we stop it? They're not going to stop it. And so the question is, how can we do it well? How can we set ourselves up to succeed and to win from it? Um, and then you look at China, they're investing a lot, but they have this demographic cliff over the next 50 years that it's going to be hard for them to recover from. And so, I'm not saying we don't have challenges in America. We do, but I would not trade places with any other advanced economy in the world. Not by a mile. >> Neil, adding to that, so you said you're bullish on it long term. Uh, do you think that that will help with those some of those some of those fundamental structural demographic challenges? You t you mentioned China, but in the United States too, we're seeing falling fertility rates. We're going to continue to see labor shortages potentially because of those fertility rates. Does AI have the chance to actually make up for some of that and help us? You know, potentially if we can get our productivity growth higher and we do more with the same number of people or or a slower labor force growth rate, that's that's certainly going to help. It can only help on the margin. I mean a huge tool that we have had uh battling back against our the demographics has been immigration over time. It is fueled so much of our economic growth over the history of our country and that is a tool that is avail still available to us that is not available to many other countries. I mean China does not have the culture to accept immigration only. Maybe that'll change. They've not done it historically. Japan has not done it historically. you know, we've done it better than just about anybody else. And so that is a tool available to us if we choose to exercise that tool going forward. >> And I think you would tell me that's a fiscal policy kind of question, right? >> It's a it's a policy question for our of our political leaders. But I'll just observe the math. You know, one of the sources of of economic growth is productivity growth. The other source is population growth. >> More workers to produce things, more consumers to buy things. And if you're not growing your own, then you're going to have slower growth unless you decide to embrace immigration. And that's just math. >> Other questions for Neil? >> Yes, sir. Mic's coming up on your right behind you. >> Hi there. I'm Kyle Copelan. Uh I'm an economics professor at Black Hill State University. Uh it's already come up a couple of times, but uh credit access to credit's a really critical thing for people trying to get into home ownership. Uh on the other end, we also have uh people with um fixed income and so higher house prices, I mean, we're in one of the epicenters of house price growth in the region. The other one in South Dakota is the south side of Sou Falls. So, how do people not only trying to become homeowners, uh, but then also people on fixed income, can you talk about the experience that those two groups of people might have, uh, as the Fed tries to combat inflation, especially over the next two years? >> Yeah. So, it's a very complicated question that the professor is kind enough to ask me. Um, uh, a lot of times elected leaders will say to us, "Hey, home affordability is out of reach for too many people. You need to cut interest rates." And I'll just do the math for them. You know, if you if you just cut interest rates, ignoring the rest of the economy, and let's say mortgage rates were to fall so that a paycheck goes farther, uh a mortgage payment goes farther, but you don't have a lot more homes being built, what ends up happening is the price of the homes just goes up. And it is not at all obvious that you you benefit affordability at all. So the affordability and housing crisis that we have is driven by the fact that we've not built enough homes. Since the great financial crisis in 2008, 2009, home production in America is way down from what it was before. And we have a shortage, a structural shortage of the number of units that we should have built that we did not build. Interest rates cannot solve that because as I said, if we cut interest rates, you're probably going to push up prices. You've got to unlock the supply side of the economy to make up that gap fundamentally. Um, I don't know if that begins to answer the complicated question that you asked, but you're right. I mean, you've got first-time home buyers who are struggling. Uh, they struggle with down payments. They struggle with uh affording the mortgage. And then you also have fixed income folks on the other end who saying, "Hey, the prices are high. I can no longer afford the property taxes on my home, for example." Um, so it's it's a challenge and there's not an easy solution like pull this one lever and it addresses it. The best solution to all of the above is more supply and so local localities need to look at what can you do locally to try to remove some of the barriers that is preventing more supply from coming online. >> Further audience questions looking out there. Yes sir. Oh, we get a mic coming up on your right. Hi, Mr. Kari. Thank you for being here. We really appreciate it. My name is Dan Dwer and I work with banks managing interest rate risk. So, very very timely uh for us to get a chance to talk to you. Um my question is getting into the weeds a little bit here but your the dot plots from the open market committee or the or the forecasts of the 1819 individual members the the stratification of these forecasts are as wide as I can remember right it's just amazing you know difference of 150 200 basis points my question to you is as we go forward what is keeping you up at night in terms of the possibility of getting this wrong either continuing to cut rates and the yield curve massively steepening out alla 1979 1980 or perhaps thinking about a rate hike cycle which could severely damage the the employment part of your mandate. Thank you for being here again. >> Yeah. So, uh it's a it's a good question. There are a couple different mistakes we could make right now. One mistake is hey when the labor market starts to slow it tends to slow very quickly. So, could we wake up and say instead of a 4.2 or 4.3% unemployment rate, we wake up and it's five or we wake up and it's six. That's a possibility. Uh, I don't put high probability on that, but I also can't rule it out. I don't think it's likely that we're going to wake up to four or 5% t inflation because we can do the math of what tariff rates translates into what inflation. So, I think the risk of inflation is more of one of persistence that it's not so much of a one-time event, but it stays at 3% for an extended period of time. That's how I think about those two risks. Having said that, you know, a year ago, we saw some signs that the labor market was slowing and we cut interest rates and then the labor market held up fine and the economy kept surprising us being more resilient. Over the last two or three years, we kept thinking the economy is slowing and then it proved to be more resilient. So, on one hand, I think that there's more risk of a labor market negative surprise than a big uptick in inflation. On the other hand, if I were to guess which mistake we're more likely making, I think we're more likely betting that the economy is really slowing more than it really is because we've we've kind of thought the economy was slowing a bunch over the last two or three years. Let me back up and I'm going to stop my answer. You know, ser consumers keep getting asked questions. how are you feeling about the economy? And for the last three years, consumers have said, "The economy stinks. I'm gloomy as heck." And then they go spend thousands of dollars on Taylor Swift tickets and they get on planes and they go out to restaurants and people are spending money like crazy. And so there's a disconnect between how people are feeling and what they are actually doing. And I think that that's it's feeding into this confusing picture that we have right now. Other questions for Neil? Neil, I don't see any out there, so let me ask you one. Um, I see my friend Jesse in the back. Uh, he's with South Dakota Trade. Um, I've heard some anecdotes from the a community. Uh, and and they basically go like this. Hey, listen. No one's buying our soybeans right now. We used to sell them to China, but because of this tariff war, no one is buying them. Uh the fear I have structurally is that the the Chinese will find other markets uh where to to buy their soybeans. So Brazil, other places like this and that when we finally settle down with this tariff war, those structural changes will be in place and then our markets won't come back. Am I wrong in thinking that? Are you hearing the same kind of anecdotes and and what do you have to solve that? Uh I've heard this one of our board members is a is an a leader uh who's shared this these very same concerns with us. Uh absolute concern. You know think at a very high level you say well it's a global market. China doesn't buy our beans. They buy somebody else's beans. Then we sell our beans to whoever they were buying from. But in reality what's happening is you're seeing other countries respond by growing more beans. And so more supply is coming online and that is going to have a permanent effect on the price of soybeans and it really disrupts our markets. And when our our whole supply lines are set up to ship to China, it's not so easy to now turn it around and ship it someplace else. So all of these concerns that you just shared, we hear a lot of. Uh I take them very seriously and I wish there was something we at the Fed could do. There's not. All we can do is try to keep inflation in check. And it really is a question for our elected leaders and for fiscal policy to try to address. >> But you are hearing that. So it's not just me this. Okay. Loud and clear. >> All right. Other other questions? I know we have someone on the >> Let me ask, do we have any students in the room? >> I just thought we did in the back. So I'm curious. We're hearing anecdotes. I mean, I'm gonna I could call on you, but I'd rather you be brave and raise your hand. Um, we're hearing anecdotes that in this labor market, students are finding it challenging to find jobs. Curious, is that your experience? Is that what you're hearing from your friends? What are you all finding? >> We got a mic behind you if you guys want to raise your hand and answer. >> She she's raised her hand up. >> Oh, somebody else. Just thank you for going first. >> Hi, I'm Maddie. I'm from Black Hill State University. I'm a junior. I have been gracious to find a job. I work at Walmart in Spearfish and then they have been offered me an internship. So, I think it's been it's places are hiring and I think it's pretty I don't think it's too difficult for college students to find a job. So, I think >> What about jobs? So, what about a job when you after you graduate kind in in whatever your field is? Are you pretty optimistic that you'll be able to find something that you're looking for? Yeah, I think a lot of people are looking and you can like see the postings and I've seen a lot more than where I have them back at home. >> How about in the back? Some of the hands that were up in the back. >> See this now? You're never going to raise your hand. >> You got them. Yeah. All right. There's one. >> Okay. My name is Hannah. I'm also from Black Hill State. Um I'm lucky enough to be from Spearfish and so I have connections for my while at school time. Um, I think it really depends on what you're going to school for. All of us here are business accounting majors here for class purposes actually. Um, >> you getting credit for being here? >> Yes, >> those 20 extra credit points are going to be amazing. Um, but uh for us, we have amazing opportunities. The business and accounting opportunities in the Black Hills are just like not comparable to other places. >> You have a pretty insulated labor market that's distinct. Um, you know, I don't know. I'll put Jeff on the spot. Jeff asked a question earlier. Do you have another one? I'm sorry. Oh, there is. Yeah. Oh, sorry. >> I was just going to say that our faculty does a great job of getting people to come in and so I think that gives us a lot of opportunities for Yeah. job fairs and everything. We we have people coming to us for internships and then jobs after as well. So the business side of it at least is really great in that in those terms. >> Thank you. Sorry, I was going to say uh we've got a member of the board of regents with us. He asked the question earlier. So Jeff, not in addition to being a financial adviser, he's on the board of regents. So he gets exposed to some of this information and maybe Jeff might help us with a little bit of that data. >> Yeah, I think it's kind of interesting. Um the reality is employers want South Dotans, which is great. our work ethic, you know, our backgrounds are are are really good for employment opportunities. In addition, I would say that the the universities in South Dakota and maybe around the region are really looking at the four-year degree and whether or not it's has the ROI that we think that it does, and we're constantly asking that question. So for for the uh the region, we would say that we're there's some opportunity for us to do two-year degrees, stackable certificates, you know, all kinds of things that we're trying to be very creative about in the university system so that we can actually help the workforce and train the workforce for what the workforce actually needs, not what we think it needs. So we're doing a lot of that at the university system to be ready for whatever it is. And it might not be a four-year degree. >> Thank you. Uh, other questions? I think we have time for I think we're supposed to get him out of here by five or fiveish. Yeah. Okay. We have probably time for one or two more questions maybe in the audience. If not, I'll have to ask him about Bitcoin. I I literally was just thinking, oh, we got away from no Bitcoin questions. Uh, we'll see if we can do that. We've got a can up over there. >> Yeah. My name's Sam. I'm a software engineer. And so I appreciate data and your repeated mentioning that you use data to help arrive at some of these decisions. Um, and I also appreciate you mentioning that there's like this firewall between the Fed and the federal government. That said, there have got to be synergies there because the federal government is one of the largest producers of data. And so what economic data does the federal government produce that you use in its decision-making? and how has the shutdown impacted that and what measures are you having to take to compensate for the the current shutdown? >> Thanks. Uh we we use a lot of data that's provided by the federal government. So our core inflation statistics to get down to 2% that comes from the federal government. Our core job data, the unemployment rate, uh how many jobs are created every month, that comes from the federal government. So the most important data that we rely on comes from the federal government and we're not getting access to that data right now. Now what are we doing? We also get access to private sector data. So there are uh ADP is a company that does a lot of payroll processing. They compute their own analysis of what job growth is and we do an we do models of how close is the ADP data relative to the official data. So if we need to lean on that a little bit more during this period, we will lean on that a little bit more. Uh we look at job posting data from Indeed, a private sector firm to try to get a sense of okay, are are more jobs being posted or fewer jobs being posted and we compare that to the official data as well. So we have access to a lot of data and not one piece of data is determinative on what we're going to do. It all forms part of a picture and that picture is complemented by conversations like this to help us make sense of the data that we're getting. And so we need the government data. We rely on it, but we can make our way through while the shutdown is happening. But the longer it goes on, the more the less confidence I have that we are ultimately reading the economy appropriately because there's no substitute for the for the gold standard uh government data that we rely on. probably have time for one more question. Yes, sir. Get you a mic up here. It's coming on your behind you on your right. Resh Patel a businessman and u I'm thank you for hosting this event and I have a question with the way we get concerned with current situation no matter what but what your role at Fed is other than is there any other impact you create other than rate policy employment or inflation management but looking at current situation the way things are being created and uncertainty every day and every week or every month or every other day things are changing. So no matter what feds at your office what you do what kind of impact can you create or what other impacts does your office create or ch make changes to our economic status of overall general in soio economic structure but with all that going on is it something like the feds are feeling that they are being kind of diminishing value or diminishing their impact on what they are doing and their role is kind of diminishing out of what they are intended to be And do you think that will persist? >> I don't think the I think the role of monetary policy continues to be very important in our economy. I think um it gets when things go well, you know, when when inflation was coming down in 23 and 24, people were saying, "Hey, not everybody, but some people were saying, "Hey, Fed, great job. You guys are doing a great job. You're keeping the labor market strong." I thought they were giving us more credit than we deserve. And when things go badly, sometimes I think we get more blame than we deserve. Uh monetary policy is important, but it's not the only thing that's important in the economy. And so I think monetary policy is going to continue to have a very important role to play. And if the Fed is kept independent of the short-term political considerations, I think it'll be able to do its job as it was designed to do. But as you said, there are many other things that are happening in Washington that are of paramount importance to the economy, to the public, to the world, and those are completely outside the scope of the Fed. And so those are those are important, too. Well, I want to just say thank you all. Like I said, every time I visit South Dakota, we have a wonderful visit. People are very warm and welcoming, very uh happy to share their experiences and their anecdotes, which we really appreciate. We learn a lot from this. Uh we always have wonderful hosts. So really appreciate it and uh and thank you. It's been another great visit. >> Neil, thank you so much. Thanks for the question. Let's give him a round of applause, please.
