https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/Neel-Kashkari-at-the-Montana-Chamber-of-Commerce

Q&A with Neel Kashkari at the Montana Chamber of Commerce

June 26, 2025

Helena, Montana

Neel Kashkari

Good afternoon. My name is Todd O'Hara. I'm the president and CEO of the Montana Chamber of Commerce. For those of you that aren't familiar, the Montana Chamber of Commerce is the state's largest business advocacy organization. We represent businesses throughout the state of Montana and every business sector, including natural resources and agriculture, retail, manufacturing, and high-tech. And also part of the Montana Chamber of Commerce is the Montana Chamber Foundation. And that is our educational arm of the Montana Chamber of Commerce. And the Montana Chamber Foundation's role is to educate Montanans of all ages about the importance of economics and its role in our everyday lives and the importance that business plays in uh creating a better lifestyle for everyone. Briefly, the Montana Chamber of Commerce, we're guided by a strategic plan that was put in place by business leaders from all over the state. It's a 10-year strategic plan that was designed to increase the economy of the state of Montana and improve our economy so that we as Montenants have an economy that we are deserving. and business leaders told us in 2016 that we should focus on things like business climate, workforce development, infrastructure, and entrepreneurship. And so our charge through the Montana Chamber of Commerce and the Montana Chamber Foundation is to influence policy and affect change in those areas that we can. And a lot of that is on the state level. And there are a lot of things that are out of our control, including the macroeconomy and what happens on the national level and geopolitical unrest and uncertainty. Those are items that are out of our control. And that's why I think it's really interesting that we have this unique opportunity here today to have the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis to join us in a really unique opportunity. Neil Qashqari has spent a couple of days in Montana and I know that yesterday he was at Bosezeman visiting with some of our high-tech business companies and learning about how Montana's economy is changing and changing rapidly away from the economy that most of us are most familiar with and how it's changing the landscape for Montana and creating some of the pinch points that that we're all feeling. You know, with a growing economy comes a growing population and increased housing prices and problems that quite frankly are problems that it's good to have because it's a sign that we are growing as a state. So, I'm honored today to be able to introduce the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neil Qashqari. And moderating and joining in this sort of a conversation is Larry Simkins, the former president and CEO of Washington Companies. And so would you join me in welcoming them to the stage? Thank you, Todd. Am I on? Thank you, Todd. There we go. Um, good afternoon and welcome to the uh town hall event this afternoon. This is an incredibly unique um opportunity to have Neil here with everybody. I'll tell you with Neil um don't be bashful about asking questions. We're going to rely on you to ask questions as we move along here. But we're delighted to have Neil here um as an introduction and you've got a little bit of it in the materials, but um Neil is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. There's 12 regional banks and there's one branch the for Minneapolis that's located here in Helena. Um Neil is I think the second longest Fed president of the 12 starting in 2016. So he's been around for a while. Um the district includes uh Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, northwestern Michigan, and the upper peninsula of Michigan. So, he's got an incredibly large area to cover. Um, he's also this year currently a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which adds to his already um extensive duties at the at as a president. Um, before joining the Fed, uh, most notably Neil in 2008 was assistant secretary to the Treasury and during the financial crisis, he oversaw the troubled asset relief program. So, in addition to all that, he's got a busy family life with a with a wife and a recently graduated kindergartener and two kids. So, um he's got a lot going on and uh we're just really thrilled to have you today. So, before we start the conversation, Neil, any opening remarks? Well, first of all, it's great to be back in Helena, great to be in Montana. I try to visit all of the states in our region that we cover at least once a year. Sometimes I make it to Montana twice a year. uh our job is to represent all of you. So with our colleagues, with our branch and Helena, with our board of directors, some of our board members are here from our Helena branch. Larry, I'm going to sing his praises for a second, served on our Helena branch board for three years and six years on our Minneapolis Fed main board. And Larry, I'm grateful, was on the search committee that hired me 10 years ago. Uh so we have a special connection. Um, but we count on people like our board members and our contacts to give us a sense of what's happening in our regional economy. I go back to Washington DC every six weeks for these Federal Open Market Committee meetings. And in those meetings, we talk about what's happening in the national economy. Now, we cannot set a different interest rate for Montana and for New York and for Washington DC or California. It's one, we all use the same dollar. So, it's one monetary policy for the country. But my job is to make sure that this region is part of that deliberative process. So the meetings that I've had yesterday and today and the town hall that we're having right now is part of how I gather information about what's happening on the ground. A lot of times we look at a ton of data on the national economy. A lot of times those data are sending mixed signals like is inflation going up or is it going down? Well, how do you make sense of those mixed signals? Part of the way we make sense of it, I make sense of it is by hearing from you. What are you seeing and what are you experiencing? That helps me figure out which data should I focus on more this month when we decide where interest rates should go. So, thank you all for being here and I really appreciate Larry serving as moderator. It makes a huge difference when we have somebody who's as knowledgeable as Larry is to help with this discussion. Well, thanks Neil. I appreciate that. Um there's a lot to cover with the Federal Reserve. We see it in the in the papers all the all the time. So just before we get started, let's just set the stage for two basic things. One of them talk about the dual mandate so that we could set the foundation with that. Sure. So Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913 and they have given us our assignment. The assignment, the primary assignment that they've given us is stable prices. what we define as 2% inflation and maximum employment, as many Americans working as possible. Now, those two things are sometimes intention. Sometimes you could think of them like a seessaw. If the economy gets really hot and businesses have to struggle to find workers, the unemployment rate goes down, businesses pay big wages to keep their employees, and then inflation goes up. In that environment, a central bank would typically raise interest rates to cool the economy down. On the opposite, if the economy is going into recession and the unemployment rate goes up, inflation would likely go down and then we would typically cut interest rates to boost the economy. So that dual mandate is what we're always trying to achieve because that's what Congress has told us to achieve. Now go to uh the difference between monetary and fiscal policy. Thank you. So monetary policy is about the money supply and interest rates. And that affects what it costs you to get a mortgage. It affects what interest rate you're going to pay to get a car loan. It affects what the interest rates are on your credit cards. That is separate from fiscal policy. When Congress and the executive branch decide how much do they want to tax you and me, how much do they want to tax businesses? Do they want to make it in income taxes, capital gains taxes, and then what do they want to spend that money on? Do they want to spend it on health care, on defense, on education? All of that is fiscal policy. And if they're spending more than they're taking in, then they're going to raise the debt to finance the government. All of that is not our job at the Fed. That's the job of Congress and the executive branch to figure out. Our job is to try to achieve whatever decisions they make over here. Our job is to say, "Okay, that's fine. That's your job. We know we have to get inflation at 2%." And have as many Americans working as possible. I'm going to sneak one more in and then we'll get to the questions. But as you were talking, I was thinking about I spent um six years on the Federal Reserve Board of Minneapolis and the amount of deliberation, the amount of discussion, the amount of intellect that goes into determining what's going on in the economy and determining monetary policy. um is something that was um way beyond my expectation when we first started there. And one of the things that was really important that you walk out of there after two terms understanding is the importance of the independence of of the Federal Reserve. And so let me throw that one out there and talk a little bit about the independence because I think it's a it's a critical issue that behind the curtains I was able to see and understand how important that is. And I think as we hear it in the um in the news today, it'd be good to have Neil's perspective on that topic. So this is something that has evolved and emerged over the last 40 or 50 years where basically every democracy in the world has concluded that keeping monetary policy out of politics is better for the long run performance of the economy. Those economies that have independent monetary policy uh generally end up with lower inflation over time, generally end up with a better labor market over time, generally end up with more better economic competitiveness over time because not picking on partisan politics. Every president, every member of Congress is going to want their constituents to succeed today. And so sometimes, you know, we have to raise rates. We raised rates aggressively when inflation took off. Not everybody liked that. We did it because we said we got to bring inflation back down. And if we said, "Well, don't worry about inflation. Let's just keep rates low." Well, inflation would have kept going and kept going and gotten embedded in our economy. And our economy, economies all around the world are better off when these types of decisions can be made for economic reasons, not for political reasons. And that's why all of my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve are absolutely committed to doing our very best. We're not perfect. We're going to make mistakes, but do doing our very best to making our decisions based on data and analysis, not anything else. Okay, I think there's a couple of um There we go. microphones around the room. Do we have a question? So, just to say we are live streaming this. Oh, uh so this is your chance. You can be famous. Uh do me a favor. I as Larry said, I love it when people ask me your toughest question. Now, don't hold back, but do me a favor. Introduce yourself before you ask the question. Any questions? Let's talk about inflation while they're starting to uh figure out who's going to ask the first question. So, um we see, you know, different things on inflation coming. Every day there's a different thing on inflation. We talk about tariffs and that at at some point inflation's going to rear its head. I mean, where are you on inflation now? And how do you think about that as far as a component of the economy? So, two or three years ago, inflation was really out of control. Depending on how you measure it, looked like six, seven, 8%, maybe even 9%. C what caused it was a bunch of different things. The reopening of the economy, like the the services sector was shut, so we were all buying goods. In a normal year, Americans buy some mix of goods and services. Well, when the services sector was shut because of COVID, we were flooded the goods market and then the supply chains for those goods were all gummed up because of COVID. So, prices went through the roof and then you had Russia invading Ukraine which sent oil prices and commodity prices skyrocketing. So, a confluence of events caused this really high inflation. We raised rates aggressively. The supply side of the economy got better and inflation started to come back down. Right now, I think inflation is running at about a 2 and a.5% rate. So, that's above our 2% target. We have to get it all the way back down to two, but we've made a lot of progress. And going to the other side of our dual mandate, the unemployment rate nationally is about 4.2%. So, the labor market is still a good labor market. It is cooling from where it was a couple years ago, but so far it's not falling off a cliff. It is just gently cooling. And we want it we want this to continue. We want to keep the strong labor market, get inflation back down to 2%. Now Larry, you mentioned tariffs. This is a curveball because now all of a sudden if you increase tariffs on the price of imported goods, the price of those goods is going to go up. Some of that's going to be paid by the supplier, some of that's going to be paid by consumers. How much of that gets passed on? Is that a one-time effect? Is it more persistent? We're not sure yet. And so we've been basically saying, hey, we need to go slow until we have more clarity on what's happening with tariff related inflation. But I will say this, the underlying inflation data has been quite positive in the last few months. So that's good news, but we still need to get a better assessment of where what impact tariffs are going to have on the economy. We just we don't know yet. And as you think about your questions, um, you know, Neil talking about, um, how they're setting monetary policy, things like inflation. We often think that unemployment numbers come out, the Fed's seeing those, and then there's a meeting and they think about it. Neil's here today getting on the ground information from you to understand what the underlying reasons are. So these types of interactions and engagements are incredibly um important for you know where where we head with monetary policy and how Neil thinks about his decision at the FOMC. Hello, I'm Mike Burgard from Bosezeman on a commercial printing plant, manufacturing plant, 67 years familyowned. So you you took part of my question by talking about tariffs. So I'll try to follow on with that. We definitely see that in the supply chain right now, but there's definitely a drag in the market in that we've gotten a lot of notices that price increases are coming early June, 1st of July, 15th of July. And so I wonder come maybe a couple parts to the question. One is the drag that delay and two from our perspective, you know, we we need customers, etc., But we're not inclined not to pass that on because in a relatively hot market, at least in our area and I think in Montana, it's just going to reduce my profit margin. So you say some's going to be passed on, you know, as a business person, I'm going to pass 80 90% of it on until the market really collapses. So kind of two questions on that. I mean, I see these I've probably had six or eight price increases coming from major suppliers. They just have just barely started. Yeah. Well, this is a question, you know, is is there just a delay in these effects? Like we've So, the conversations I've been having the last two days, I've been asking businesses, what effect are you seeing of the tariffs on your business? So, we've heard anecdotes of businesses that bought a bunch of stuff in the first quarter in anticipation of tariffs. They said, "Hey, we we think tariffs are coming. There's been a lot of chatter about it. let's go buy the stuff we need from abroad right now before the tariffs hit. And they're still working down that inventory. So, they have not yet had to pass on cost increases to their customers. But if the tariffs stay high, they're saying we will have to because we're going to have to replenish our inventories and then pass those costs on. So, I think there are some some factors that are delaying the effect. We're not feeling the full effect. And then the what what you said basically is I mean I believe you and I I applaud your courage for saying it out loud. Businesses are going to pass on as much as they can, right? That's the nature of a market economy. Um and so what one thing we saw in 2017, I think I'm going to get this anecdote right. Tariffs went up on washing machines and dryer prices went up by the same amount. So businesses may pass on more than they can, right? Uh just depending on the dynamic. So, um, there's going to be some effect. There will be some effect, but ultimately we also know right now there are active negotiations apparently underway between the executive branch and our major trading partners. So, where are these tariffs going to settle? I don't know. And so we've also heard a lot of businesses saying, "Hey, we don't want to pass on cost increases yet because if the tariffs come back down to something more normal, why would why do we want to anger our customers if it's going to if it's going to be a temporary thing?" So, it's just there's a lot of unknowns right now. Next. Oh, I think I'm next. Hi, welcome to Montana. Glad that you're here. My name is Jennifer Olsen. I'm the government affairs director for the Montana League of Cities and Towns. So, pleasure to have you, not only in Helena, but visiting all of uh our cities and towns across the state. I have a I have a two-part question actually. Um my first question is um how does um the monetary planning that the Federal Reserve um is doing? uh how does that compare to or what is your anticipation of how that looks for bonding availability for infrastructure projects and what that would influence at the state and local levels. And then also um is there data or information or researches or uh research that is important as you decide how um I guess those the monetary policy looks that cities and towns could help participate in or um help to educate um what's happening in Montana specifically. Boy, the um I'm not going to have very satisfactory answers especially to the first one. I don't have much insight into the connection between our decisions and bonding availability at the state level. Uh our research director, Andrea Rafo, is here. I'm guessing he's not going to know the answer to that either because so much of what we focus on is national level effects and international effects. Uh it's hard for me to I don't know the answer. So, but I'd be happy to connect you to Andrea and we would explore with our colleagues who may have better insights into the specifics of the question you're asking. And then what was the second part of your question? Can the microphone come back to you? I was saying um based off of the um monetary policy that you have, is there research or data that would be helpful uh from a local government perspective particularly for those rural communities that have um you know a lot less um data to provide but really still have an important element. So if you go to our website minapolisfed.org, or we have a whole community development and outreach group that reaches out to communities all across the region that are not just the big cities to understand what are the challenges that they're facing. You know, by the way, our board of directors is not just made up of leaders of big companies. We also have small businesses. We also have people who live in rural communities. Our Montana board of directors, our Montana branch board of directors also has people from across the state. We do that on purpose to make sure that we are getting a wide range of views. So I would encourage you, we'll connect you to somebody in our research department, but then I would encourage you to look at our website and some of our community development research that we do that I do think is much more relevant to some of the smaller communities that you're talking about. Since Centrea is here, um when you do look at that website, there's a lot of resources out there and depending what month it is and the flavor of the research, getting on for some of the live um chats and and data that's on there is incredibly well done. And so there's a there's a wealth of data out there that you just go on and and um it's pretty interesting that what you can find on there at any time. Who do we have next? John Sack. Welcome to Helena. It's great to have you here. John Sack, uh, for the first time ever saying this, retired president of Carol College as of 19 minutes ago. I have a question for you. In your recent discussions with business leaders across the 9inth district, what are the most significant challenges and opportunities you're hearing about, particularly regarding labor market conditions and sectoral shifts? How might these regional insights shape your input at the national policy level? Well, um the biggest challenges that we've heard in the last two days uh have been about issues that are not going to surprise you at all, which is housing and child care. And the connection to the labor market is businesses saying, "Hey, we've got people we want to hire whom we want to bring here, but they can't find a place to live and they can't find childare." I know these are not surprising to you. Um, so that those are real issues for sure. The other thing that I heard more often than not was tariffs are not yet affecting most businesses in Montana in a big way. Some bought early to get ahead of it. Some have said um they think things are coming, but Montana kind of is its own economy and kind of does its own thing and seems to be going all right. I did hear a lot of businesses say that they have they are they serve government or they they bid for government contracts or they serve companies that participate in government contracts and a lot of those contracts have dried up or or or are on hold even if the money has been appropriated from Congress. There's a there's a freeze in Washington right now that is affecting a lot of businesses that would be serving that market. And so that's that's another overhang right now. and then just the broader uncertainty that everybody has been feeling. Uh those are some of the key themes that came up. Welcome again to Helena. Richard Milenberger. I'm uh soon to be retired and currently the CEO of a local community health center. And um I I guess it's kind of a statement, kind of a question, but uh what we're seeing is a significant inflation still. We uh we have a a um primary care clinic that includes dentistry. I I'll use this as an example because it's a kind of a basket of dental instruments that we have to replenish. Last time a couple of quarters ago, $12,000, $15,000. Now, some of these are produced in the United States. Some are imported, but that's the best bid we could get and sign. I don't know what the percentage is on that, but it's well over 10%. um hiring folks for a medical assistant or dental assistant. We were at $18 $19 an hour a year ago can hardly get anybody to apply with $201 an hour now. So, we're seeing inflation kind of pushing us up and then uh not increased reimbursements of any significance on the uh either government or private programs. And we just broke even for the first time in a while. So, it's uh it's it's concerning to us. So, uh we don't we're not in the markets. we don't uh not not really uh having to borrow or have the ability to borrow a whole lot of money. So, we're not as as concerned about um the interest rate situation, but I I am wondering uh aside from the tariff issue that core inflation, it just doesn't seem to resonate here. It seems like it's a little higher. Is that just a an issue of labor market or what what do you expect is going on in this region? you know, um it's it's complicated. Everybody's experience is a little bit different. And so the these official government statistics, economists go out and they try to construct what they call a basket of goods and services that a typical American family will buy, housing, whether it's rent, car payments, uh gas, food, clothing, education, and then they try to come up with that and then track that basket over time. And so I have no doubt that the data you're reporting is correct. I'm sure that that's the experience. But there are going to be other sectors which are telling us we're seeing dis we're seeing deflation. What are you talking about that there's still inflation? And so we have to try to deal with the economy as a whole because every sector is going to be experiencing something a little bit different. And and I'll also say generally speaking, most people think that their own inflation is worse than everybody else's inflation. You know, I always joke that everywhere I go, they think that their housing costs are the highest in the nation. Um, I was I told the story earlier today. I gave a presentation a couple years ago to some housing advocates in Minneapolis. And I showed them data of housing affordability and amongst large cities in America, Minneapolis was one of the most affordable places to live. And they refused to believe it. The data must be wrong. And I just said, "There's the data." And um, we do our best Hi. Hi there. Thank you. Uh, Victoria Sack and I'd like to ask the question that I sort of thought my husband was going to ask a moment ago, but I think maybe in the last 19 minutes he's just moved on. And wait, I have a question. Did he literally retire 19 minutes ago? Literally had his exit interview 19 minutes ago. So, who who retires on a Thursday? But I'm thinking 22 minutes ago his question may have been I mean there's there is a lot of increase in costs for education for students coming up there will be fewer loans. the loans that have been available won't be available and so people will be forced into borrowing on the regular market at much higher rates. We're seeing the flight of international students from our universities. I have to think this is going to be an economic problem beyond just the impact on local colleges and universities. Is this something that you're taking into consideration? And what kind of impact are those educational pressures having? I mean, there's a it it's a it's a long-term issue on the long-term competitiveness of the US economy. No question about it. Um, for a bunch of different reasons. If you look over time, our economy has become more of a knowledgebased economy. Even manufacturing jobs are becoming much more high-tech than they were 20 years ago or 30 years ago. So we have to educate more and more of our young people with more and better education over time. And the answer cannot be they just all take on more debt. That is not a sustainable model. Um and at the same time we know immigrants have provided high-skilled immigrants especially but enormous innovation capital to our economy. Uh and so that has got to be if we want to be economically competitiveness competitive in the future that's got to be part of that mix. Um and then there's a lot of complexity underneath what you said. I mean if you look nationally many colleges have been struggling for students like in a sense we're over capacity and so what does that mean? There's going to be closing of some colleges and there's going to be consolidation and that trend is probably going to continue. Um so it's a very complicated situation. My read of it is I don't think it affects the economy next quarter or next year, but I do think it's a very important long-term issue for the economy. Good afternoon. My name is Steve Turquitz. I am also a retired person. I was with the Montana Bankers Association. Had the pleasure of you visiting at us in 2008 at our convention uh during the TARP days. And so you've seem to have weathered it well. I'm not sure about myself since my question is a little bit more esoteric is uh in the last 10 to 12 months we've seen the dollar decline up to 10% uh historically and then also we've seen a tremendous interest or changes or movement in the acceptance of cryptocurrency. How do you see those two factors evolving as our economy continues to shift? As Larry mentioned and as well as Todd, the changes in our sectors and the changes in the com composition of our economy, how do you see those two playing in that? Well, the dollar um let me just say this. What what determines which economy is the reserve currency? Because over human history, it has changed. uh it depends on which major economy investors around the world have the most confidence in that determines the reserve currency and I'm not going to bet against the United States like you know we have our challenges and some of our challenges are self-made uh but I wouldn't trade places with any other advanced economy in the world but could is it possible that Europe could get its act together and become really competitive it's possible is it possible possible that China could fix all of its problems and become really competitive. It's possible, but I would still bet on America. And so I think we're, you know, we we have our challenges. We got to get through them. I still think we are far and away the most competitive major economy in the world. And so that means the dollar is going to be the preeminent currency for the foreseeable future. Cryptocurrency is a joke. I mean, let's just be clear. It's it's basically a it's basically a tool instrument of speculation. If you want to bet on it, be my guest. Um, you know, you want to bet on Beanie Babies, bet on Beanie Babies. Uh, there's basically no utility for cryptocurrency in an advanced economy other than circumventing bank regulations. So, if you want to get around bank regulations, like if you go to your bank and say, "Hey, I want to go fund I'm going to go buy some cocaine from abroad." Your bank better tell you no, you're not allowed to do that. Um, you could use crypto for that. You know, that's not a choice I would make, nor would I recommend you making that choice. But that's basically the only utility of cryptocurrency in an advanced economy is getting around bank regulations. It's been around now for 14 or 15 years and it's basically useless other than as an instrument of speculation. And lots of crypto bros are watching this right now and Twitter's going to get lit up. Uh and I'm okay with that. You've uh you've toned it down a little bit. I have toned it down. In February of 2020, we were in Callispel, Montana, and it was so that's right before CO and I asked Neil the question. He had just had his daughter and I said, "I want to buy your daughter a gift. Should I buy her some cryptocurrency or a treasury bill?" And he talked that cryptocurrency was a garbage dumpster fire. And that hit every crypto headline right as COVID hit. So, it stuck out there for a while. Now they're all going to say, "See how stupid he is? He should have told Larry to buy Bitcoin for my daughter because look at how it's done." Look, Beanie Babies can go up before they go down. Be before we go to the next topic, just as as long as we're talking about um things like AI, let's pivot to AI just for a second here. There was a article in the Wall Street or an opinion in Wall Street today that talked about is the Fed ready for AI? And it was more about AI being uh productive enough to create and understand the markets better than humans do and that we do now. And so um how do you envision AI? That's just a preface to the question. How do you envision AI not only in the economy but also as a component of what the Fed does and their daily work? So, as in contrast to how dismissive I am of crypto because it's been around for 15 years and it's basically useless, AI, people are using it every day, I use it, it's transformed how I access information, for example. Uh, it's incredibly useful and it's only a couple years old. And so, that's just a great contrast for me. One is actually useful technology that people are finding new ways of deploying every single day. So, I'm really bullish on AI. I'm excited about it. I don't subscribe to the doomsday scenarios that we're all going to be out of jobs because AI is going to do everything. You know, in the in a market economy, jobs change. There was 150 years ago, people worked on farms and then automation came to farms and and industrial scale technology came to farms. People moved to factories. the nature of jobs is going to change. But I'm bullish that AI can continue to drive our productivity engine that can help society get better and society become more uh successful and we could all have more grow the pie so to speak. So I'm bullish on AI. Um I think we have to study it very carefully. We at the Fed are studying it. We have very careful test projects going on underway. You know, one of the dangers is if you put in something in the AI, it then gets absorbed by the Borg. You know, kind of the and like we don't want our confidential data to get absorbed by the Borg. So, we have to be very very careful with how we experiment with AI, but we are studying it very carefully and I am optimistic about it. So, maybe the AI bros can come to my defense from the crypto bros. Hi, uh Jake Eaton from Billings. So, uh President Trump and Chairman Powell obviously have a very publicly tumultuous relationship, we'll say. Can you talk to us a little bit about how maybe that impacts your work with the Fed in general, but maybe more specifically with the Open Markets Committee and how that impacts all of you? You know, it doesn't. Uh we all believe deeply in that the Fed, we should be making decisions based on economic reasons, not on anybody's political pressure. We've had politicians opining on what we should be doing long predating the current administration. Many politicians on both sides of the aisle uh have expressed opinions and our jobs are to focus on the data and analysis and make the best possible call we can for the economy. And that includes not overreacting the other way. So if if a politician is criticizing us saying I want you to do X and we say well we're going to do the opposite to prove we're independent. That would be playing politics. So we work really hard to say what is the data telling us to do and try to make our decisions based on that. Hi there John Benion with the Washington Companies. One thing that I was interested in is I I understand the lanes that you have versus Congress and yet every once in a while Congress does something really big that we all know is going to impact the economy and since you've been around it sounds like you've probably experienced the the tax cuts from 2017, COVID stimulus, inflation reduction act. So, not necessarily to ask for your comments on what Congress is deliberating now, but after those things happen, are there things that you do differently process-wise or u you know on the ground when you just know something big is going to impact the economy? Yeah. Well, we have a team of economists at Minneapolis, at all the reserve banks, and in Washington who run economic scenarios of what the economy is likely going to do. And they run an input into that are things like tax policy, our fiscal policy, trade policy, all of those are inputs into that forecast of how does the economy going to respond. So, we actually take it on board. We're not saying this is good or bad. It's just a fact. And then we try to estimate where the economy is headed and then that influences what do we think the right monetary policy is to achieve 2% inflation and maximum employment. So it's it definitely is a factor uh but not one that we offer a pro or con opinion about. Hi Chris Averil um at a PR and consulting firm here in Helena. You've talked a little bit about the changes in our economy going to a more service-based now the introduction of AI. Where do you see the American economy in 10 20 years? Is there a chance for a manufacturing revitalization or are we just going to continue going down down down the path that we've been going? I mean the the thing is what are we really great at? We are really great at innovation. I mean, it's we're so far much better at innovation than any other advanced economy in the world. So, are we going to be manufacturing uh routine products? I doubt it. Are we going to be manufacturing things that require very innovative manufacturing processes? Sure. You know, so whatever is innovationdriven is the thing that we we excel at and I expect that we're going to continue to excel at it. And it's, you know, there's the services economy which is desperate for innovation. You know, there are a lot of services that we still do the same way we've done them forever. And if we can come up with smarter, better ways of doing those things, super. And then on terms of manufacturing, we're great at design. You know, we're great at designing very complicated components. And then I would say manufacturing the highest tech stuff. I think we're really good at that. I would expect that to continue, but you know, 10 or 20 years is a a long time to try to forecast. We're not very good at forecasting next year, but offering you an opinion. We do our best as long as we're talking about forecasting. Um, you know, a week doesn't go by and there's another prediction out there on a recession that 65% this week and then something happens and it's down to 50. first um talk about what the definition of a recession is first and then talk about how you view or ho how I guess we should be looking at those stats as they come out and are volatile every month uh when a different policy comes out. Yeah. So, first of all, the technical definition of a recession is negative GDP growth for two quarters in a row. And there's a team of economists that officially decide when a recession has happened. And they usually decide it after it's over. They'll look back at the data say, "Oh, it turns out that uh a year ago to six months ago, we were in a recession." Like, "Thanks, guys. That's very helpful." Um, but that that's the technical definition of a recession. Um there's been weird things going on in the economy where people the last few years have been very gloomy mostly because of inflation. You know, they'd answer surveys and they say the economy stinks and it's mostly because inflation is high and they don't like high inflation and neither do I. But they were going out and spending. Like if you just looked at the surveys, the surveys would say, "Boy, the economy is really going to be hitting the wall now because everybody's so gloomy." And yet people were feeling gloomy yet they were spending. And so, you know, and there have been a lot of recessions predicted over the last few years that thankfully did not come. Uh, one one time period is when Silicon Valley Bank blew up in March of 2023. That sent a shock wave in the banking sector. Uh, I thought, boy, that's going to have a big impact on the economy. I hadn't predicted a recession, but I thought that could have a big impact on the economy just by scaring everybody. It ended up not. And so, you know, a few other things. You know, when I said when Putin invaded uh Ukraine, it sent oil prices and commodity prices through the roof. When Hamas attacked Israel, it didn't. That kind of surprised me. I thought it would have. And now when uh Israel and now the US attacked Iran, I thought it would send oil prices through the roof. Thankfully, it didn't. I I can't tell you why. And so some of this stuff is is it's really hard to predict. Tom Severson for Center State Bank. Um when you're leading up to your meetings and you're doing your balancing act between unemployment as well as inflation. other data or maybe more specifically sources of data that you may lean on more than others or is it a totally homogeneous approach or um there's got to be differences especially like us armchair economists can like look at and have some idea of what's going on but probably not I mean we look at uh we're always looking at the the official inflation data the influal unemployment data and it depends on the circumstances in the moment uh so for example when supply chains were really gummed up. We spent a lot of time calling businesses, Larry's old business, Larry and his old business, um, many businesses that have global supply chains, and I'd get on the phone with the head of the CEO of ex Fortune 100 company, and I'd say, "Can you put me on the phone with your head of your supply chain? I want to understand in real time, our supply chains getting better or not? How quickly, how long is this going to last?" So a lot of it is in the moment of what do we think is hitting the economy where we need to better understand that who are the experts we can talk to. When COVID hit I spent an amazing amount of time talking to the best health experts in the country to try to figure out what they knew about this new disease how is it likely going to spread how long is this going to be going on for? Because ultimately that would be driving the dynamics in the economy. So I can't give you a blanket answer. It's going to depend on what's going on in the economy. Right now, the conversations are, are you experiencing tariffs in your business? How are you passing, if you are experiencing them, are you passing those costs off to your customers? What did you do with your inventories when you anticipated tariffs? What's happening to your inventories now? These are the kind of questions that we're having, right, that I'm asking right now. So, just as a follow, so is it safe to say that it's a balancing act between personal interaction and the It is a balancing act between personal interaction and the data. The data gives us a baseline. Sometimes that baseline is confusing and then the the conversations we have with businesses and labor unions uh help us fill in the blanks where we don't have data. I'll give you another example. When inflation took off and we wanted to get a read of inflation expectations, one thing we knew is when inflation took off in the 1970s, labor unions negotiated cost of living adjustments in their union contracts. So if you're negotiating a three, four, fiveyear union contract, you might be demanding a cost of living adjustment, an inflation index for the next five years. That would be an indication to me that inflation is getting embedded into the economy. So we convened labor unions and said, "Tell us how your negotiations are going confidentially. What are you asking for?" And one of the things that we saw was they were asking for a big increase to help their members catch up to the high inflation, but then they basically were assuming that inflation was going to go back down to normal. That was helpful to me to have comfort that inflation expectations were not getting out of control. Uh the Minneapolis Fed covers a region. Oh, sorry. I'm Jennifer Eern from Billings and I'm involved in economic development here in the state. Um, the Minneapolis Fed covers a pretty heterogeneous region of some big cities in there, but a lot of rural and I'm wondering uh how you see the economy here in Montana visav some of the other states that are in your region. And then second um second part of this is um you were instrumental in helping create the opportunity and um inclusive economic uh institute. the focus from the Minneapolis Fed. Um, so with that experience, what recommendations would you have for policy makers, for business people uh, here in the state in terms of things that Montana should be focusing on to keep our state economy competitive and moving forward? I think Montana has a lot of strengths. Every time I come here, people are generally optimistic. Um, the number one challenge that I mentioned is housing. And people will acknowledge it's kind of a problem of success, which is a lot of people want to come here. I know there's a lovehate relationship with the show Yellowstone. Um, I understand. I've never seen it myself, but I understand it. Um, and so I think Montana has a lot going for it. I think tourism is a is a bigger part of your economy here than it is in some of the other states that we cover. uh and that's uh both as a source of strength but also you know has some weakness but has some risk associated with it if there's a broader downturn and people don't want to travel etc there's an exposure there so I think Montana is very well positioned I think the advice I would give you you already know the only solution to housing is more housing that's it there's nothing else there's no point talking about anything else the only solution to housing affordability is more housing and that's a cultural challenge Because what I've fared it out is people want to keep Montana the way they know it. So they don't want to build a lot more homes because if you build a lot more homes, more people are going to move here. Well, what does that mean? Home prices are going to go up if you don't do that. And so you got to build more housing. And so but that's up to you to decide. But the only solution to housing affordability is more housing. That's it. And then the opportunity inclusive growth institute is a great center really focusing on understanding the labor market and what are the gaps what are keeping people out of the labor market. Uh and it really helps us understand our maximum employment side of our mandate. Thanks for raising it to hold just one second. Todd did a had a really good um CEO round table this afternoon and one of the topics um that we talked about quite a bit was energy and so um I think you know given the discussion earlier this afternoon any thoughts how does energy work into your thought process on everything from inflation to you know building the economy those types of things along the way I mean energy is uh enormously important you'll often hear us talk about core inflation where we strip out food and energy, we don't strip it out because it's not important. It's really important, but energy prices tend to be volatile. So, if we want to see where inflation is headed, we tend to pull those things out. But long-term for the competitiveness of the country, energy is enormously important. Um, first of all, I mentioned why haven't oil markets responded to some geopolitical events. In part, in part, it's because we become such a big domestic producer of oil and gas that has helped insulate us. You know, when Russia invaded Ukraine, natural gas prices skyrocketed in much of the world. Didn't move nearly as much in America because we have so much homegrown energy. So, it's a huge competitive strength that we're able to produce our a lot of energy domestically. Whether it's oil, gas, or wind, or solar, all of this matters. In terms of the future of the economy and AI and data centers, all the forecasts of electricity demand are just through the roof. And so we have if we are able to produce uh cheap energy, clean energy cheaply, it's going to be a competitive edge for us in these new technologies. And so I think it's important if you're if Montana is going to be a uh you know can get your regulations right and be a net uh grower of your local energy and power supplies, that's going to be a competitive strength for you as you're competing with other states uh for data centers, for example. Yeah. Um Glenn Opel with Plus Communications. We're a DCbased uh public affairs firm and I run our office here in Helena. You mentioned def deflation. Is the cause of def deflation because we've expended all the COVID stimulus or is there something else driving that? So, um, I'm going to make one quick adjustment to what you said, which is I'm going to distinguish deflation, which is prices falling across the economy with disinflation, which means inflation is lowering, but it's not negative. So, we're in a disinflationary period. We still have positive inflation, but it's getting lower. So, forgive me, minor minor adjustment. What's really caused that are a bunch of things. Supply chains were really screwed up. They've gotten a lot better all around the world. Second, the services economy reopened. So when the services economy, airlines, hotels, restaurants were all shut, we were stuck at home and we bought way more goods than we would normally buy. And that has rebalanced. So now we're spending more into services and less overloading the goods sector. That has helped a lot. Oil prices have not continued climbing. they've leveled out to kind of more normal levels and a lot more oil supply has come online. I would say yes and also the fiscal stimulus has has run down in terms of the extra cash that people had. I would say the biggest factor and monetary policies played a role too. I would say the biggest factor is the supply side of the economy that was really screwed up because of COVID has largely healed itself. I think that's the biggest factor in getting inflation to come back down. Hi, I'm Pat Holland Sturgar with the Montana Department of Commerce and my question is with the increasing role of private credit in the economy, I'm curious as you and your team look at many data sets to fulfill your mandate, does that affect the availability of data or the granularity of data that you can see as to what's going on in the economy? I don't. So, let me just elaborate on your question. So, private credit is a fairly new phenomenon where um traditionally a a business would go to a bank to get a loan or they would go to the if they're a big business, they go to the bond market to raise debt to go if they want to build a new factory. Now, in recent 10 years, a bunch of private credit funds have been raised by private equity companies who will then go to pension plans and insurance companies, raise money, and then they lend money to businesses and this thing called private credit. And you're right, we have less visibility into the private credit uh areas. I think it's less of an issue in our understanding of the economy and it's more of a potential concern is are there systemic risks that are building there that we have less visibility into. That's probably the bigger risk. Now, I will say this as I've studied it, private credit vehicles tend to be much less levered than banks. So, if a bank is levered 10 to one, private credit vehicle might only be levered one to one. and banks often fund themselves with overnight liquidity deposits that can disappear tomorrow. Private credit liquidity tends to be much longer term maturity. So in those two dimensions, it should not it should represent a de-risking, not an increase in risk. Nonetheless, we don't have a lot of visibility into exactly what the terms are that they're loan loan loaning money into whom they're loaning money. So there are some gaps that are being created. We got about five more minutes. Do we have one time? We got time for one or two more questions. Thank you for being here. Brian Torerson with Torans Equipment. We've been in the agriculture space since 1912. So curious, you're not the founder. I look really good if I'm the founder. No, I'm not. I'm first generation but uh proud to be Montana. Question is, can you give some insight as you look into the agriculture sector on tariffs, commodity pricing, and the effect that this is having on our nation's economy? I I happen to think that the egg sector is the backbone of our economy. So, could you give some insight to that, please? So, we have um a really important in our region. It's really important to the country. I agree with you. Uh we have uh CEO of a big agricultural conglomerate CHS corporation on our board of directors. So we talk about a a lot. Uh his name the CEO is Jay Debertine. And Jay is you know pounded into me. It's not the tariffs that hit farmers, it's the reciprocal tariffs that hit farmers. And you looked at what happened to the soybean markets and soybean experts exports the first time around. Um, and I think what what I understand is a lot of farmers made it through because it ended up being that Congress passed a lot of support to support those farmers who were affected by the reciprocal tariffs. So, the question is, is that going to happen this time? You know, and where are their beans or their other uh crops going to end up going? Um, you know, when I've talked to farmers, I've said to them kind of as a naive economic view, you know, why do you care who buys your soybeans? It's a global market. If it used to be China, now it's somebody else. Why do you care? China's now buying from Brazil. And what they've enlightened me on is, hey, shifting your shifting where you're selling to doesn't just happen overnight. It's like a very disruptive process. And years of investment go into building and establishing these supply routes and these uh end markets. And so when these things get disrupted, it is very disruptive for the farmers in question. Um so uh I don't know where it's going to end up. I don't know where tariffs are going to end up. I don't know where reciprocal tariffs are going to end up. Um, but I know it's a big deal and I know it's something that we're watching very carefully. We have one more. Yeah. One one other quick thing I'll just say markets are incredibly powerful in finding ways around and through barriers. So when Russia invaded Ukraine, I heard from major food companies that talked about the fear of famine in Africa because Russia is invading Ukraine because uh Russian grain and Ukrainian grain would not make it to market and then that will starve the poorest consumers in the world because the slightly more wellto-do consumers will be able to afford the grain and it's the poorest consumers who would starve. Russian and Ukrainian grain found its way to market. And so it's remarkable how markets can. Now, I'm not saying that those manufacturers or those producers had the same profits they would have otherwise had, but it's remarkable how products find their way around and through barriers. And so, it's just something that is sticking in my head as I watch how this is all going to unfold. Anything we miss, Neil? I don't know. Yeah, Larry, you're the expert. Um, anything else top of mind for you? Uh, we usually have some epic closings with some questions, but I remember one of them when we had a had some students and one of them uh in the front row stood up and asked Neil as the final question. I'm graduating for college. What advice do you have for me in my first job? And Neil's response was, "Whatever it is, just crush it. That's all you need to know." And so that's definitely something I would have said. People ask me, young people say, you know, how how should I go about networking and how should I spend time networking? I said, stop worrying about networking. Do a great job in your job. That's the first thing you need to do. Do a great job in your job and everything else will follow. But I'll I'll give you a choice tonight. You've got you two things. You're a fan of history. So, I'd love to hear who you think the most underappreciated person is, character is in history, or we could talk about the Cleveland Browns, history. Yeah. So, I was born and raised in Northeastern Ohio. And unfortunately, if you're born and raised in Nor Eastern Ohio, the Cleveland Browns are like an incurable disease. Okay? It's in your blood and there's nothing you can do about it. I can't I every year I swear I'm done. I'm not going to watch anymore and I cannot look away. Um so history um I'm not sure if he's the most underrated but I would just put a plug in for Ulissiz Srant uh one that led the charge to win the Civil War with President Lincoln and to come William Tecumpsa Sherman uh and he's kind of fallen out of favor over time in history. Give Grant a look. He belongs on the National Mall, which by the way are the names of his two children. Great. Yeah. Ulisses and Tecumpsa are the name of my of my children. I have a I have a very accommodating wife. Well, thank you, Neil. This has been a treat and we really appreciate you being here. So, thanks for being appreciate it. Thank you.
