https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/Neel-Kashkari-at-La-Crosse-Area-Chamber-of-Commerce

Town hall with Neel Kashkari at La Crosse Area Chamber of Commerce

June 24, 2025

La Crosse, Wisconsin

Neel Kashkari

Well, good afternoon everybody. This is great crowd. I know it's a little rainy today, but appreciate everybody being here. Um, uh, my name is Sam Bachmire. I work for Lacrosse County Community and Economic Development and on behalf of the Lacrosse Area Chamber of Commerce. Uh, welcome to today's town hall event with the president of the Minneapolis uh, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis um, Neil Kashkari. Um, before we get started, I just want to recognize our sponsors um, that uh, have supported our event today. So, our supporting sponsor is Riverbank. Thank you, Riverbank. Um, our premier sponsors are State Bank, Bremer Bank, and Allis. Thank you all. And our presenting sponsor for this afternoon is Trust Point. So, again, thank you all for being here today. Um, working for Lacrosse County, I have the opportunity to speak with a lot of, um, businesses, uh, employers, community partners, and we really do, we have a a very dedicated, passionate group of local leaders in the community. um strong uh school districts, higher education, um core industries like manufacturing, healthc care, food and beverage production. Um we've got a lot going on, a lot of opportunity in our community. Um and when things are, you know, constantly changing at the local, state, and federal levels. I think it's a wonderful opportunity that we have here to speak with somebody who had who plays such a critical role in shaping our uh our our nation's economic landscape. So, um, as an introduction, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is one of tw uh, one of the Fed's 12 regional banks. Um, the Minneapolis Fed District includes Minnesota, North and South Dakota, Montana, and, uh, um, northwestern Wisconsin, and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Uh, Neil serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets the nation's monetary policy. Uh, before joining the Fed, Neil had a number of roles in public service and finance. Most notably, he served as the assistant secretary of the Treasury during the 2008 financial crisis, where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program. In addition to all of Neil's professional accomplishments, he also balances a um a busy home life as a loving husband and father of two young children. Um please well uh help me in providing a warm lacrosse welcome for uh President Neil Kashkari. [Applause] So I kick off. Yeah. So, uh, Neil, before we get to questions, is there anything that you would like to add or share to to start today's conversation? Sure. So, why don't I, um, we have these these questions that we're going to ask you, let me just, uh, add a little bit before we dive into the questions. Our jobs are to represent all of you. So, I go back to Washington DC every six weeks and we set interest rates for the nation and FOMC meetings, Federal Open Market Committee meetings. We cannot set a different interest rate for Wisconsin and New York and California. We're the same country, the same dollar. So, it's one monetary policy for the nation. But a big part of my job is to understand what's happening in our economy here. Bring this back to Washington. And when we deliberate on what monetary policy makes sense for America, feedback I get from you will help me make that recommendation. So, that's why I'm here. That's why I'm eager to have this conversation with Sam and with all of you. So, as my colleague Ron said, we're going to ask you a few questions just to kick off the conversation. So, let's go to the first slide. So, which of these best describe you? An employer, worker, student. You're looking for work, not working, not retired, or retired. So, employers and workers, a few students, it looks like a few retirees. Okay, let's go to the next question. Uh, recent businesses, uh, re how has business activity been so far this year compared with the same period last year? Is business weaker right now? Much weaker. Somewhat weaker, no change. Stronger, much stronger. Okay. So, what I'm seeing is basically around the same or maybe skewing slightly weaker but not dramatically different than last year. Okay. Next question. Uh inflation. What's your sense of price changes? Are prices declining significantly or all the way up to increasing significantly? Okay, we've got increasing somewhat. That's good. That matches the data which we're going to talk about. Uh, next slide. How would you describe labor demand in this region? Strong and growing to poor, no labor demand. Okay, sounds like the labor market in this region is uh steady. Next, what impact are tariffs having on your business? Very negative, somewhat negative to very positive or somewhat positive? Okay. Little to no impact or somewhat negative. And then just a few more I think. Go ahead. Uh, what impact are tariffs having on your family, your household as a consumer? I'm curious. the family that said it's very positive. So somewhat negative to little to no impact. Kind of similar to the business perspective. Okay. Is that it or Okay. Word cloud. One to three words. What's the biggest challenge facing this regional economy? And Ron put in a nice shout out to Quick Trip. Biggest challenge facing this regional economy. Isn't it funny? The first word that popped up was housing. And it's just getting bolder and bolder. So, I'm seeing housing, child care, population, taxes, wages, talent. Okay. Next. What's your outlook for the this economy over the next six months? Very optimistic to very pessimistic. Okay. Somewhat optimistic. Okay. Somewhat optimistic. Is that it or is there another one? All right. Thank you for participating. That was great. Great way to kick off the conversation. Should we both have a seat and just have a have a chat? Sound sounds good. So, I will um I'll start a primer or two questions to get going here, but as you have thoughts, questions um that that come up, uh please raise your hand. We've got a couple roving mics with Brandon and Angie um around here. So, please uh do not hesitate to raise your hand and and speak up and ask what you have here. So, um to start, Neil, you know, I think you know, we're a a a room of of businesses, employees, etc. in the community. um you travel across your district and speak with many businesses, large and small. What are you hearing and and how does that impact your your decisions? Well, we're hearing um strong fundamentals on the economy. The last couple years, the economy has done quite well and a lot of nervousness about the tariffs that have been announced and where is this ultimately going to settle. A lot of businesses have said to us, hey, they can deal with whatever the tariff rate is going to be, but they need to know what the tariff rate is going to be. And as you know, I think the big trading partners are all negotiating what is the new trade regime going to look like. So, a lot of businesses are saying that they're on hold right now until they get clarity about that. Meaning this, someone might say, "Hey, I want to build a new factory. Do I build it here in Wisconsin? Do I build it in Mexico? Do I build it in Asia? Uh how do I design my supply chains? They're nervous about making some massive investment if the rules are going to change in a way that they had not anticipated. So I think underlying demand is pretty good. Uh fundamentals are pretty good. I'm not saying there are not pockets of weakness. Uh we'll talk about the housing market. I'm certain of that. But there's a nervousness about hey, what does the future look like? We'd love to see that future so that we can get on with making some decisions. Great. Thank you. Do we have any questions yet or I'll keep moving. Um so how should we you you had mentioned um inflation and that influencing some of the decisions that businesses are are making. Um how should we as a as a room as a community etc. um be feeling about the recent uptick in inflation and and what do you and your your Fed peers expect moving forward? Well, you all know coming out of COVID, we had this massive inflation surge that we had not seen in 40 years in America. We were surprised by it and it was driven by things like supply chains that had been screwed up, a lot of surge in demand from stimulus, uh the services part of the economy that had been shut. So, we were all home buying goods and so the good sector of the economy got overloaded at the same time. So we had this big spike in inflation and Russia invaded Ukraine at at about the same time sending commodity prices through the roof. So for the last four years we've worked very hard to try to bring inflation back down. And right now the underlying inflation rate in America is running at around 2 and a.5%. We have a 2% target. We're still above target. We need to get it all the way back down, but we've made a lot of progress relative to where we were two or three years ago. Now the the tariffs have introduced a a comp a it's a complexity now that we're trying to understand. If you tariff goods that you're buying from abroad, it's kind of obvious the price of those goods goes up by some amount. Some of that's going to be absorbed by the supplier. Some of those is going to get passed on to the consumer. How much of that gets passed on? Still a little bit unclear. And is it just a one-time adjustment or does it lead to something that's more persistent? That's also right now unclear. So, we have the Federal Reserve has basically been in wait and see mode saying we need to get more clarity on how this is all going to play out in the economy before we have confidence on what tariffs are going to do to inflation. Now, the last two or three months, the inflation data that we've been getting has been quite positive. It suggests that that disinflationary path that I described has been on track, but it isn't obvious that we've seen the full effects of the tariffs yet. So, we've been taking our time to try to get a sense of what's really going on before we make any uh dramatic changes in our policy outlook. But the fundamentals of the US economy appear to be quite uh strong right now, quite quite sound, and inflation appears to be heading back down to our target. The tariffs are still a question mark that we're trying to get our heads around. We have one back here. Uh Neil, I'm curious on your thoughts on the federal deficit. It seems like for a decade we've been reading that they're too big and they're going to negatively impact the economy and yet like you're saying now things continue to be good news and there's a lot of press just about, you know, with the new budget they're going to get bigger and just all this bad news and yet that doesn't seem to happen. I'm just looking for some thoughts on that. Well, let me start by saying the federal deficit and taxes and spending, that's what we call fiscal policy. That's the domain of Congress and the executive branch. That's not the Fed's job. The Fed's job is monetary policy. And there's a bright line behind it. We're supposed to stay on our side of the line, a bright line between the two. But I'll say this generically speaking, we know that many countries around the world have gotten into trouble when they have had about a 100% of debt to GDP. Markets end up losing confidence in those economies. Uh Argentina is one that comes to mind over and over and over again. And we now have 100% of debt to GDP. So some people have said, "Boy, that's really concerning." At the same time, there's, for example, Japan that has twice as much debt to GDP and has historically not had any trouble financing itself. So, are we more like Argentina or we more like Japan? And where is that danger point when a country gets into trouble? The unfortunate answer is nobody knows for certain. It's a little bit of a relative game which is the US economy is the economy or the major economy around the world that investors have had the most confidence in and that's given us a lot of runway and a lot of resilience. If another economy, say Europe or say China, emerges as a real competitor to the US economy, then I could imagine investors around the world might make different choices and say, "Hey, America has 100% of debt to GDP. If this other advanced economy has less debt to GDP, maybe they would want to invest there." I'm not forecasting that, but it's it's a little bit of a relative game, which is we have by far been the most exceptional economy, which has given us this great privilege. Is that relative exceptionalism going to continue or is it going to change? I don't know. And so, I know I'm not giving you a satisfying answer, but there's a lot that goes into when does too much when is a lot of debt become too much debt? I think I saw where are we looking? Right over here. Neil, you mentioned one national mon. Stand up so I can see where you are. There you are. Thank you. You mentioned one national monetary policy, but there's 12 regions. What does our region have to do to remain competitive domestically and internationally? Well, our region has a lot of strengths going for it. So, our region is quite diverse economically. If you look at most major sectors of the US economy are represented here. Obviously a lot of manufacturing, a lot of technology, health care, mining, a lot of agriculture. So in a way what we call the ninth Federal Reserve district looks like a smaller version of America. Uh so you know first of all keep doing good things fundamentally to make make our economy competitive. There's a contest amongst 50 states trying to attract businesses, trying to attract workers. One of the things that came up on the word cloud was that housing, affordable housing is a huge challenge in this region. Everywhere I go in our region, affordable housing is the number one issue that people talk about. Whether it's a red district or a blue district, it doesn't matter. This is not about partisan politics. This is just about what families are experiencing. A lot of businesses will say, "Hey, they want to recruit workers to come here, but those workers can't find a decent place to live that they can afford." And so, one thing we could do is try to get our local housing policies right to make it easier to build. You know, if you look at home costs in this region, it's more expensive to build in this region than it is in some other parts of our country. And why is that? It's a lot driven by local decisions that well-meaning local elected officials are making. Nimism, call it what you will, which ends up driving up the cost and driving down affordability. So, if I were to pick one thing that could make our region more competitive for the next 20 years, it's reforming our local housing policies so that more supply can come online so that people could afford to move here and live here. How does a fractional reserve banking system work with a Bitcoin world? Okay. How does our how does our banking system Thank you, sir, for bringing up Bitcoin. I always appreciate these questions. Uh um no, I I I'm teasing you. Uh Bitcoin is uh my opinion, I've watched this now for about 15 years. It's been around for 14 or 15 years. and 14 or 15 year. Let me let me back up. Excuse me for a second. Raise your hand if you have used some type of AI tool like chat GPT or Grock or something in the last few weeks. Okay, most hands have gone up that I see. Raise your hand if you have bought or sold something with Bitcoin. Not bought or sold Bitcoin. bought or sold something using Bitcoin. Okay, one or two hands have gone up. So AI, these large language models have been around for a couple years and the vast majority of us are using it routinely. I use it all the time. Bitcoin's been around for 15 years and it's basically a instrument of speculation where there's no actual use case that has been demonstrated in any kind of advanced economy other than circumventing bank regulations. So if you want to like if you go to your bank and say hey I'm going to go fund some illegal arm sales your bank is going to say not with our bank you're not but that's where you can go to Bitcoin. And so the advantage of these cryptocurrencies is circumventing bank regulation uh or speculating just speculating that the asset price is going to go up. So I don't see it as a competitor to the dollar competitor to our banking system because there's no actual legal utility in our country for it. It doesn't do anything that's actually useful other than as an instrument of speculation. And if you want to speculate on Bitcoin or if you're old enough to remember, you want to speculate on Beanie Babies, you can choose to do that. I'm not here to talk you out of it. That's your call. But nobody tried to convince you that Beanie Babies were going to be a competitor to the dollar. So, am I worried about Beanie Babies? No. Am I worried about Bitcoin? No. Good morning. Hey, our our Treasury Secretary Bessett has talked about the growth of GDP relative to the growth of debt and he thinks it would be good if growth of debt was lower than growth of GDP. Do you think that's a good measure to look at and do you think that's likely to happen? Well, again, the Treasury Secretary, it's it's it's literally his job and his domain uh to worry about both the dollar and the debt. So, I'm going to defer to the Treasury Secretary, but I will say uh debt to GDP is a common metric that economists look at around the world to judge how an economy is doing and is one economy more levered than another economy. So, if your GDP grows faster than your debt, that ratio will get smaller and you will look relatively more resilient. So, I'd have to agree with the Treasury Secretary on how likely that is to happen. That's going to be up to the administration and Congress to decide. Monica Cruz. Um, the current administration has sent out some pretty clear signals that they would like to have more control over the Fed and maybe install some people of their own to influence monetary policy. Talk a little bit about the guard rails that are in place that would keep the Fed independent uh into the future. Thank you. So the Fed um it's taken a while. The Fed was created by Congress in 1913 and over its historyund how 11 years 112 years. Its independence from uh Congress, its independence from the executive branch has increased over time because PE politicians figured out that if monetary policy decisions are made based on data and fundamentals, not on political considerations, the economy does better over the medium to long term. And this is now widely accepted in democracies all around the world. So Congress has built in guard rails to protect the Fed. For example, there is the board of governors in Washington. There's seven governors. Jerome Powell is our chair. Uh they are appointed by the president of the United States. So three of the current governors were appointed by President Trump. Four of the current governors were appointed by President Biden. And they serve up to 14-year terms. and those terms are staggered. That provides continuity when there's a change. And then there are 12 independent Federal Reserve Bank presidents. I'm one of those 12. And I was appointed by a board of directors of local business and uh civic leaders subject to approval from the folks in Washington. So I was not appointed by either president. I was I was Obama was president when I first got my job, but President Obama didn't appoint me, nor President Trump, nor President Biden. And so these are some of the structural features that are designed to ensure that we are making decisions based on economic reasons, not based on any kind of short-term political considerations. And then very recently, a few weeks ago, actually, the United States Supreme Court issued a very important ruling that said that essentially the Fed and its leaders need to be independent. And it's about it gets technical into when can the president United States remove a leader uh from a job. Most of the executive branch, they serve at the pleasure of the president. So anytime the president wants, whoever the president is, the president could change those people. But for the Federal Reserve leaders, uh, the Supreme Court affirmed that we can only be removed quote unquote for cause, which means like if I steal, if I if I break the law, but if you just have a policy difference with me, you can't remove me from my job. So the Supreme Court now has reaffirmed this kind of structural independence from the Fed. And I'll tell you culturally at the Fed, we are all committed to making decisions based on economic reasons, not based on political reasons. Though each of us may have a different read of the economics, I know that my colleagues are doing their best to understand the economics and that's what's driving our decisions. Thanks for your question. Made it a long ways before talking about rates. Um, does the Fed have any capacity? Can you put it closer? Does the Fed have any capacity to purchase any other mortgage back securities to supplement long-term rates or is the balance sheet already pretty full from that? Well, the balance sheet uh that the gentleman asked about. So, when um when the US economy hits some kind of a crisis, the Fed has tended in recent in recent crisis to expand our balance sheet to provide more stimulus to the economy. And we did that by buying long-term Treasury bonds and Fanny and Freddy mortgage back securities. So our our balance sheet got expanded by several trillion dollars. For the last couple years, we have been now shrinking our balance sheet back down to whatever the new normal level is going to be. That process is continuing. We're we've slowed the shrinking, but that process is continuing until we get to the right new level. And I can talk to you about what determines what the right new level is. So now is, in my humble opinion, now is not the time to be expanding our balance sheet because we are still undertaking a plan to continue shrinking our balance sheet back down. Uh and then heaven forbid, you know, there's going to be another economic downturn in the future. We want to make sure that we have these kind of tools available should we need it. Got one over here. Um earlier this morning, you had an opportunity to hear from some of our um business leaders in the uh Lacrosse region. Um what uh are some of the economic indicators that the Fed is watching andor what are some of the things that you heard during that roundt that you can advise our larger group um that might be um impactful in terms of risk or opportunities in the Lacrosse region? Thank you. Yeah, you know, a lot of the we had a a couple meetings this morning. It really mirrored what we heard on the poll that we just heard from all of you, which is I think overall cautious optimism about how, you know, things are going pretty well here right now. Um, businesses that I've talked to said, hey, you know, they mostly have the workers that they need, but they're always looking for more and and workforce is is an ongoing challenge in this region. uh the universities that we talked to and the technical schools said that their graduates are finding jobs that they are in high demand. So that sounds like the fundamentals are quite strong. There's nervousness about tariffs uh and how that's ultimately going to shake out. A lot of housing related comments which is unaffordability for housing for the workers that folks need in this region for your employees is a big challenge. Uh but then also there are a lot of industries that serve the housing market. So if whether it's construction companies or furniture companies or people who are in HVAC uh HVAC supply companies that are going into the housing market, there are a lot of industries in this region that seem to touch the housing market. Um and so they they were not shy about expressing their view on where interest rates should go, hoping that that could be a boost to the housing market. And what I pointed out to them was, imagine if the Fed said, "Hey, we're going to lower interest rates to try to bring mortgages mortgage rates down. That's probably going to push up home prices." Like, so just say, "Well, you push down mortgage rates and that immediately translates into affordability." That's not obviously necessarily true. And so the best thing that we can do at the Fed is get inflation all the way back down to our 2% target. We have what we call a dual mandate. Stable prices, 2% inflation and maximum employment. If we can achieve that, that ultimately will be good for the economy as a whole and I believe good for the housing market. But housing related industries were quite vocal today on the challenges that they're facing just because there not many very many homes that are being sold. The transaction volume is very low and mortgage rates are part of that, but it's not the whole story. welcome and thank you for being in lacrosse today. It's Is your mic on? Okay. Closer to my mouth. Okay, got it. Um, you have expressed support and the importance of community and regional banks and also you've gone that there should be some more regulations that assist uh those institutions. Could you just share with us your opinions on that? Yeah, one of the things that we saw when COVID hit. So when COVID hit, the government wanted to get a lot of support out to the economy, especially to small businesses. And there was no way in the middle of the pandemic to set up some new government agency that is going to go out to hundreds of thousands of small businesses across the country. So the Fed and the Treasury turned to the banking sector and said, "Hey, we need you to be a conduit to get support out to small businesses in your communities." And you really saw community banks step up in a way that the big banks were not capable of during COVID and reach uh small businesses all across their communities to provide this kind of support, a conduit for that support. And so I think to me in COVID community banks really demonstrated what they're able to do that no one else is able to do in their communities because they're connected to so many businesses large and small in their communities. Having said that, fast forward a few years in 2023 when Silicon Valley Bank got into trouble. All of a sudden, there was a run on small and midsize banks and a lot of money was flowing into the giant banks because people said, "Well, the giant banks are too big to fail, so I'm going to put my money there because I know it's going to be safe." So, the too big to fail status of the giant banks actually created a risk for all the other banks that were out there. And so when I've talked about regulation, I've talked about actually needing to make sure that the biggest banks had sufficient regulation so that they were no longer risky and so that they no longer had this unfair advantage that they have over community banks to level the playing field, so to speak. And so um ultimately these kind of decisions are made in Washington. They're not made at the Minneapolis Fed. So we have to implement what gets decided in Washington. But if it were up to me, it would be relaxing regulation on community banks that are not risky for the economy while making sure that the biggest banks have appropriate regulations. Thank you for that. Um followup to that question, are is the Fed doing anything to encourage uh more community bank growth in the country because it seems like that has been declining over the years. And then the second question is um what challenges or nightmares do you have as far as trying to balance the monetary policy for the country versus what we need in our region versus what versus what we need in our region. Um I think the best thing that we can do to support community bank formation and growth is rationalizing regulations for community banks. We have a new vice chair of supervision, my colleague uh Michelle Bowman in Washington. She's going to be overseeing this. I know she's a passionate advocate for community banks and I think if you get community bank regulation right that can help a lot. I will say part of the reason that community banks have the number of community banks has shrunk over time partly it is there is there are economies of scale in banking and technology is a big driver of that. You know all many of us I do it I use my mobile apps to access all of my various financial accounts. All of that costs money for my financial institution to be able to implement and make sure that they're secure from a cyber perspective. As we use more and more and more technology, the bank that can support that, the minimumsiz bank is getting bigger and bigger and bigger. So part of this is technology driving some of this consolidation, but clearly regulation is a piece of that as well. in terms of balancing out the needs locally and the needs nationally. Ultimately, I know we, as I said earlier, we have to set one monetary policy for the country as a whole. So, when I go to Washington, I'm not actually saying pounding the table, we should do this interest rate because the ninth district needs it. I'm I'm using information I gather from the ninth district, from all of you to say, what do I think makes sense for the country as a whole? And then we're going to try to make the best call we can for the country as a whole. You know, we gather a ton of data on the economy every day. I have a team of brilliant PhD economists who help me sort through the data and analyze the data. The data is usually mixed. Some data signals point up, some point down, some point sideways. How do you make sense of that? Well, part of how I make sense of that is conversations with people like you to say, what are you actually experiencing on the ground? does this match up with what we're seeing in the data? That's how I can see my way through it. And so ultimately though, the the recommendation is what do I think makes sense for the country as a whole. Uh thank you Neil. With your dual mandate, do you see a scenario when where inflation is not at 2% but rates still have to come down? Yeah. So the let me back up. They're the dual mandate, stable prices and maximum employment. I'm going to give you a very simple analogy. Imagine these two things are like the sides of the seessaw. So the unemployment at at its most simple level, unemployment rate gets low. Businesses, all of you have to compete to find workers. You raise wages and then you pass those wages on to your customers and inflation goes up. So in that scenario very simply you would imagine the central bank raising interest rates to cool the labor market and bring inflation back down. Now in the case where let's say inflation is still too high. If inflation is high and the unemployment the labor market is weak that's a particularly challenging environment for a central bank because our two goals are in tension. They're not balancing each other out. we're kind of missing on both sides of our mandate. In that situation, if the labor market were to deteriorate very quickly or dramatically, I could imagine a scenario where we say, "Hey, we need to adjust rates to support the labor market." We have said when our two goals are in tension, we will take a balanced approach. You know, what does a balanced approach actually mean? It's going to depend on what's happening in the economy in that time. I'm not forecasting this. I'm just saying it is a plausible scenario. I think we have about enough time for two more questions if anybody has any last questions. Otherwise, I I'm curious um Neil, so there's obviously a lot of things taking place around the world. Um there always has been, there always will be. How much are is your decisionary? Is your decision reactionary versus looking at historical trends or future projections? How how much do you factor in current um happenings around the world into what what you're ultimately deciding on? You know, we we're always looking at different scenarios that could affect the economy and we always get surprised. So, I mean, some of the surprises, you're going to excuse us. We didn't see the pandemic coming even though we're running downside scenarios. Uh we didn't know was Putin really going to invade Ukraine and what was that going to end up doing to the oil market and the commodity markets. So for example, Putin invades Ukraine sends an oil price shock around the world and a commodity shock around the world. Hamas invades Israel and markets didn't move very much. and more recently weak events over the last couple weeks. Markets haven't moved very much. Why is that? It's a little bit, you know, I I'm happy they haven't moved very much, but I also would not have been surprised if they had moved a lot. So, we are always looking at different scenarios that could affect the economy. We're always looking at what have we learned over the last time these things happened. And nonetheless, we still get surprised. So we have to pay attention to what's happening, you know, every day. Just take another example. In the first Trump administration, the president of the United States announced tariffs against China. In the second Trump administration, the president of United States announced tariffs that were much larger than anybody had imagined. And so if we had just said, well, we need a scenario plan based on the first administration, that would lead us to one conclusion. then you actually have to see what actually happens. And obviously now, you know, we'll see where they end up. This is they're they're negotiating. They've said, I'm not revealing any secrets. They said that they're in intense negotiations with many of our trading partners. Let's see where they end up. You know, we can try to forecast this, but ultimately we need to see what actually happens and then adjust our analysis of the economy. Thank you. Last one. Last question. You keep mentioning and obviously Cher Powell says it all the time also that the Fed's data dependent. But how do you is it just hard data or is it soft data? How do you reconcile the two? Because if you look back over the last eight years, you look back the last administration for a while the hard data was very good. Soft data wasn't. And now it seems to have flip-flopped in this administration. So it's a it's uh it's tricky. So to your point, the last few years most many surveys of consumers and businesses were quite gloomy. People were frustrated mostly they were frustrated by high inflation and yet people were spending. So if you just looked at the surveys, you'd say, "Oh my gosh, the economy is going to really do poorly." But then the economy did pretty well because people kept spending. So right now I actually uh will push back gently. I see a continuation of that. So for example there are a lot of surveys of sentiment of businesses and consumers who seem quite nervous about the tariffs and the trade war and yet the economy has held up pretty well in light of some of the anxiety that people are answering the surveys. So we look at a lot of data. We look at hard data on what people are spending on what businesses are doing. We look at data in the form of surveys and sentiment and then we supplement that conversations like this. You know, going and meeting with manufacturers, going and meeting with labor unions, what are you actually experiencing? How are you actually making decisions? That helps me make sense of some of the mixed signals that we see in the in the huge volume of data that we get to look at. All right. Well, I think that that wraps up our session. Um really appreciate everybody and and especially Neil, thank you so much for uh coming taking some time out of your day and visiting the Lacrosse area, chatting with um local business leaders and and yourselves throughout today. So appreciate that. Um we wish you well in the in the in the coming uh months and and years here and uh again just appreciate your your time here today. So thank you. Thank you very much. Really appreciate it. [Applause]