https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/town-hall-with-neel-kashkari-at-keio-university-in-Tokyo

Town hall with Neel Kashkari at Keio University in Tokyo

May 28, 2025

Tokyo, Japan

Neel Kashkari

So uh thanks for coming today. Uh it's a great turnout. Um it's a true honor uh to introduce President Neil Kashkari who has graciously agreed to share his invaluable time with us today. Uh so let me give a brief introduction of President Kashkari. Uh Neil is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis which is one of the 12 regional banks of the Federal Reserve system. The Minneapolis Fed oversees the Ninth District uh which covers Minnesota, North and South Dakota, uh Montana, Northwestern Wisconsin, and the upper peninsula of Michigan. Uh before entering the world of finance and public service, Neil began his career as an aerospace engineer uh contributing to technologies used in NASA space missions. He later held several key positions in both the public and private sectors, most notably serving as assistant secretary of the treasury during the 2008 financial crisis. In that role, he oversaw the troubled asset relief program, widely known as TARP. Uh Neil became president and CEO of the Minneapolis Fed in 2016 and he currently serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee which is responsible for setting US monetary policy. So please join me in welcoming Neil with a big round of applause please. Well, thank you uh Casey for hosting. Thank you all for being here. I really appreciate it. Uh my colleague Andrea Rafo, who's our chief economist at the Minneapolis Fed, are here to participate in a Bank of Japan monetary policy conference that they have every year. This is my third or fourth visit to Japan. I always love visiting Japan. It's a wonderful country and everybody's very gracious and welcoming us. So, I appreciate being here. You know, I'd love to just have an open discussion about whatever's on your mind. Um there's a lot going on in the global economy with tariffs, uh with interest rates where they're going. Uh so I think there's a lot that we can talk about here today. So where would you like us to go? So thank you so much. Um well, this is actually a very special moment for for me personally uh because I studied at uh UCLA alongside with your director of research, Andrea. And uh during that time I was inspired by uh macroeconomists like uh Leo Haneyan, Gary Hansen, Hal Cole and Andy Atkinson. And all of them uh had strong ties with the Minneapolis Fed. Uh so to me the Minneapolis Fed always stood out as kind of a sacred place where macroeconomic superstars uh were producing influential academic research. Uh so my first question is uh how did the Minneapolis Fed come to be such a powerhouse of academic research in macroeconomics? Uh and uh how are you working to maintain and build this strong culture? Well, long before I got there, the story, the legend is in the 1970s and 1980s, they attracted a group of researchers who had very out of the box thinking about how the global economy works and how monetary policy works. My impression is when they came up with their big ideas at the time it was not they were not embraced that they were shunned by the traditional economics profession but over time they proved to have been wise and that it really did change and rational expectations I know was a big feature of their work. So much of economics is about what you believe is going to happen. If you believe that inflation is going to be high in the future, that makes it more likely to be true because your behavior changes. And if all of our behaviors change, we we're going to go to our boss and say, "Hey, inflation's high. You need to pay me more just so I can pay my rent." Then your boss says, "Okay, I need to pay my employees more, so I need to go to my customers and charge them more." And so just if everybody believes this, it makes it more likely to be true. And so the Minneapolis Fed was at the forefront of understanding how this expectations can become a self-fulfilling prophecy. But it also once you recognize it, it can be a very powerful tool to be utilized for good. So it's not just bad things, it can also be utilized for good. So at the Federal Reserve and at the BOJ and at central banks around the world, uh credibility is absolutely key to the power that we have. if if market participants and consumers trust what we say. So we say we're going to do what we need to do to get inflation back down and you trust us and you believe it and we then it makes it more likely to be true and then we actually don't have to raise interest rates quite as high to get inflation all the way back down. Expectations does some of the work for us. So it turns out that this radical idea of expectations is very very powerful in economics. It can be powerfully dangerous, but it can also be powerfully good. Thank you so much. That's uh very insightful. Um I want to further ask um how uh do you balance the academic research that you do at the Minneapolis Fed and how to uh incorporate that into policym. So this is a big debate because Federal Reserve banks and Minneapolis Fed have a team of excellent PhD economists who spend some of their time doing academic research that may maybe they would do if they were professors here or professors at the University of Minnesota. And so there's a question, well why do we hire them? Why do we pay them to do in Minneapolis in our Fed what they would do at a university? If they're going to do the same research, let them go to the university and do the research and let the university pay them. Well, what I've observed myself is that the research topics that they choose to investigate are influenced by the fact that they're in the policy environment. So these same economists that I work with, so Andrea leads a team of economists and we're debating every day what's happening in the global economy. So we have this trade uncertainty and these tariffs that are being applied. What's the effect on the US economy? What's the effect on inflation? What's the effect on the global economy? We have theories, but it's not quite so clear that it's we know with certainty what's going to happen. So they're with me every day debating these range of options and how monetary policy could respond to that. And I need their help and they help me a lot think think through scenarios. But then what I've observed is that when they go off and say, "Well, what research topics are they now interested in exploring?" It sticks and they're more likely to pick research topics that are relevant to the policy mission of our institution. And so, um, what I found is I've said to them, I don't want to get personally involved in picking which economist you hire. Hire the very best economist you can as long as they're policy curious. If they're policy curious, being at the Federal Reserve or being at the BOJ, they will find that inspiring to help shape the research topics that they pick. And it's been true. Thank you so much. Uh that's really inspiring to hear. Um I think uh it sends a strong message to students and researchers uh that uh rigorous academic work uh can have a a real world impact. So that's uh a strong message to the students here uh especially research students in macroeconomics. So thank you. Yeah. One of our one of our economists, Javier Bianke, wrote a paper in in December about how monetary policy should respond to tariffs. He wrote it in December before the tariffs were announced. And now, uh, it's getting a lot of attention. Now, personally, I don't agree with him. Okay? But that's okay. I mean, he did rigorous academic work that's getting a lot of attention. There's a lot of merit behind his ideas. Uh but that that makes me better as a policy maker. So if you were to sit in on our policy deliberations that we have, they're like uh intellectual wrestling matches where they're telling me where I'm wrong, I'm telling them where they're being too theoretical and not being practical and we're we're trying to debate all the different ways of analyzing this problem to understand what are the different options for policy makers. That's a very interesting intellectual environment to be part of. I enjoy it a lot. I get a lot out of it and I want people to challenge me. So even though Javier wrote a really good paper that's getting a lot of attention and I don't agree with his conclusions, at least not in this moment I don't agree with his conclusions, I still benefit I benefit tremendously from having him there pushing me and challenging me with his ideas. Excellent stuff. Thank you so much. Um let me talk a little bit about the the Japanese economy. Um so we all know that uh the Japanese economy has faced prolonged challenges since the bursting of the asset price bubble in the early 1990s. So I wanted to ask um do you think elements of Japan's postbubble monetary policy uh such as the zero interest rate policy and uh the early use of quantitative easing? Uh have these served as useful references or perhaps cautionary tales uh to the United States during the global financial crisis or uh even during the pandemic? I mean, I think there's a lot to for us all to reflect on. Um, there I would often hear criticisms that Japan's policy makers were simply not bold enough, that if they had only been bolder, they could have gotten away from the low inflation and the zero lower bound sooner. I'm skeptical of those claims. I think that there are broader forces that are affecting these economies that are monet one of my conclusions now this is my 10th year at the Federal Reserve. One of my conclusions is that monetary policy helps get there a little bit faster but it doesn't actually change the destination. And so if the demographics of a society, an aging society with slow population growth and otherwise low productivity growth, those are much more powerful forces than monetary policy itself. And so I I don't know for me one of my takeaways is let's be humble about how power monetary policy can be powerful but some of these other forces I think are much much much more powerful. Think about current events. So, the US is trying to negotiate ultimately a new global trade arrangement. And I I've been saying this out loud a lot. You know, why does the US have a trade deficit? The US has had a trade deficit for decades because the US is the premier destination of investment capital around the world. Those are two sides of the same coin. So if we're not going to have a trade deficit anymore, then we're not going to be the premier destination of choice for investment capital around the world. So that means we're going to end up at some new equilibrium. What is that equilibrium? I don't know. The Federal Reserve cannot affect it. All we can do is manage some of the turbulence as we get to that new equilibrium. So again, I want to be humble about, well, if only the Fed, somebody might say, well, if only the Fed had done a better job, the equilibrium would have been different. Not true. And so maybe the low growth environment that Japan was in with zero interest rates, low inflation, maybe there wasn't much for monetary polic I mean maybe monetary policy makers did what they could but these broader forces are just doing their thing. I don't know. What do you think? You're you're here. Absolutely. So productivity growth uh and demographic trends I think are creating the long run trends in the economy. So in that sense I totally agree with you. Um which is actually related to my next question. So uh one more thing uh that was going on in Japan um was population aging and uh I think the general consensus is that uh aging had uh some deflationary pressure on the on the prices uh through the uh dampening of the demand side. So my question is that uh in the US population is aging uh at a gradual rate compared to Japan that is uh but uh where do you think the trend is heading towards and uh how do you think this will affect your monetary policy or your uh inflation rate? Well, one big difference between Japan and the US, you're right, we are aging, not quite yet how Japan is, um, but immigration has been such a powerful factor in American demographics throughout our history. Uh, right now we're at an inflection point where there's a push back on immigration in the US. But over America's 200-y year history, immigration has played a huge role. And I talked to people, elected leaders both from both parties, Republicans and Democrats, and the vast majority of them agree America needs more immigrants. But most Republicans will say, but they need to be able to control the immigrant flows that are coming in. So the big political dynamic was in the southern border coming across Mexico millions of people literally millions of people were coming across and there wasn't clarity on who was coming across etc. So I actually think there's an opportunity where there's can be political consensus to design a new immigration system in America that is selective on okay we need these skills we need farm workers for farms we need healthare workers for our hospitals we need engineers for our computer companies and you map it you know many many countries do this where they say there's certain skills needed in the economy design the immigration system to get those skills that So that culturally is available to America. I think that that culturally is more challenging for Japan just historically. And so um in some sense I feel optimistic about America's position on this because we at least have the tools if we get our political consensus right, we have the tools to address our aging population. I think it's harder if culturally it's not been part of your your story. Yes. So immigration has been uh a big issue in Japan right now. Um at the moment uh the government is trying to increase uh immigrants in particular sectors. Uh but uh at the rate of population aging and uh even the population decline in Japan. Uh I think immigration is not really enough to to solve the issue. Uh so do you have any other insights on how Japan might uh be able to solve resolve the the issue of labor shortage? Well, I mean if you're not growing the people domestically and you're not bringing them in from abroad, I mean maybe robots will save the I don't know. I mean I I go around in in my region of the country of America and I say economic growth comes from two things. It comes from productivity growth and population growth. And population if your population is growing slowly, you have fewer workers to produce things and you have fewer consumers to buy things. So your economy is going to grow more slowly and that's math. So how do you get out of that? You can either try to pay families to have more babies. That's very doesn't work. I haven't seen a many countries have tried it. I've not seen any evidence that it works. Uh number one. Number two, you can embrace immigration or number three, you will have slower growth. That's it. Those are your options. And so that's it. I mean, it's like math. So either you grow the people at home or you bring them in or you I guess you pray for robots. ect are you not I don't know what do you think so yes I'm I'm counting on the robots in Japan uh we are facing labor shortage uh especially in particular sectors so the demographic is aging and there's an increasing demand on caregiving so uh should we have an expansion in the service sector in the caregiving sector uh by employing more people that's not really uh happening at the moment. Uh we are increasing immigrants in this particular sector but that's not enough but gradually uh robots are uh introduced into the caregiving sector and this but that seems like a very diff I mean as an outside observer that seems like a very difficult assignment for a robot. You know, think about this. Five years ago, I heard from experts in Silicon Valley who were convinced that fully autonomous self-driving cars and trucks were right around the corner. And we are still years and years and years away from that being widespread. In the US, many of the test pilot test vehicles have been shut down. Companies have been shut down. There's still pilots going on, but we they we were told that the long haul trucks that drive all the way across the country, that's a pretty easy problem to solve, relatively speaking, because you just you get on the highway and you drive straight for two days. Even that has not been solved yet. That strikes me as a much more solvable problem than a robot caregiver to an elderly person. So, I guess my my guess would be maybe the people who would have been driving, if you can solve the driving problem, then you don't need taxi drivers and then you can reallocate some of those people to the more complicated task of caregiving. I'm just guessing. No, that's I I think absolutely correct. So, the portion of caregiving that you could rely on robots is limited. So you will have robots that will uh automatically bring up your bed uh when you feel uh like uh you want to wake up and have some uh some meal then the robot will do that for you. But this is the robot and not really that's not that's not what I think of when I think of a robot. Absolutely. It's not like running around. Yeah. Uh taking care of you. So uh but uh yes that's the the situation in Japan and uh perhaps uh since Japan is uh the leader of population aging it might be a new trend in in the world. So that would be my view. Um so one last thing I wanted to ask. Um so I think you always get this uh wherever you go but uh cryptocurrency is getting so popular around the world. uh and uh how is your view on this new tool? Uh is it uh a fear for monetary policy? Uh is it uh destabilizing? Uh I I want to know um what you feel about this this new technology. It's not a fear and it's not destabilizing from what I can see so far. Um so Bitcoin, let me ask you this. Let's do an experiment right now with all of you. Let me see a show of hands. Who has used some type of generative AI tool in the last week? Okay, virtually every hand has gone up. Who here has bought or sold something using Bitcoin ever? Okay, not a single hand has gone up. Bitcoin has been around for 15 years and there is still no legitimate use case in a developed economy anywhere in the world other than circumventing banking regulations or engaging in some form of illicit activity where you don't want to be able to trace it. 15 years and generative AI is a couple years old and we're all using it and so like so one of them there's actual utility one of them is actual productivity enhancing one of them is merely an instrument of speculation now I'm not opposed to speculating if you want to speculate on it specul speculate on it you're probably too young in the audience but 15 20 years ago people used to speculate on beanie babies maybe Pokemon cards I don't know I'm sure Um, so speculate all you want. I don't see that as a competitor to the dollar. I don't think that is a problem for central banks. I do think it's a problem for people who think it's going to keep going up and up and up and then at some point it doesn't go up and then they lose money. I feel bad for that. You know, we were told at some point that Bitcoin was an inflation hedge. Then when inflation took off and the Federal Reserve raised rates and the B other banks raise rates to not just the Fed, Bitcoin got crushed demonstrating that it was not an inflation hedge. It was just a levered speculative asset essentially. And so know what it is and then that's okay. Thank you so much. Um, I have many more questions to ask, but uh, I I don't want to hog all the time. So, I I think it's time to open the floor for the Q&A session. So, if anyone has a question, please uh, raise your hand and uh, microphones will be roaming around in the back over there. Okay. Uh thank you sir. Thanks for your uh insight sharing and my question is about the uh tariffs and the trade war between US and China. So my question is given the long-term structure shifts caused by the US China trade war including reuring decoupling of supply chains and potential persistent inflation inflationary pressures. How do you think those development challenges of Fed's traditional monetary policy toolkits over the next decade? Well, how are tariffs going to change our toolkit? I'm not sure. Um, eventually, as I mentioned earlier, eventually the global economy will settle into this new equilibrium. And what do I mean by that? Eventually supply chains will get redesigned. Maybe maybe some manufacturing will come back to the US. Maybe it'll shift from China to other countries. You know, we'll see. And once that settles out, if the Fed is committed to our jobs, which is to keep inflation at 2%. Inflation will get back down to 2%. The price level will be higher by some amount. And the interest rate that achieves 2% in steady state may be different. But I don't think necessarily that I mean I think we'll be able to achieve our 2% inflation target once we get to that new equilibrium. I don't know how long it's going to take to get there and I don't know what that equilibrium is, but I'm confident that we can get back to a 2% inflation rate again. The price level will be higher and the interest rate environment may be different, maybe higher consistent with that 2% inflation. Does that make sense? Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Any other questions? Oh, right there. My name is sorry. I hope you have a wonderful time in Tokyo. Uh my question is regarding uh President Donald Trump's me he recently mentioned that he has plans to privatize fenyak and Freddymeck in America like you have been into that situation in 2008. What are your thoughts about his ideas of privatizing Freddy Mack and Penny Mack again? Like there could be some negative consequences regarding that matter. So I don't know the details of what the administration is planning. Uh so I'm I'm not really in a position to comment on their specific proposal, but as a general matter, the question that I would ask is uh so Fanny May and Freddy Mack are these quasi government institutions, quasi private, that provide guarantees to mortgages, what we call conventional mortgages in America. So if you're buying a normal house in America, you could go get a mortgage that's effectively subsidized by Fanny and May and Freddy Mack because they're providing a an a government guarantee on those. So the question is this, who takes the risk if there are losses? If it's a true government guarantee, then the US government, the US taxpayers take the risk and who's getting the upside of the privatization? So one theory is they should just be fully nationalized where the government takes the risk and the government takes the upside of the fees they collect. The other extreme is they're fully privatized. It's a private guarantee and the private sector gets the reward. What got them into trouble in the 2008 was that the private sector was getting the upside and the government was providing the guarantee and that misaligned incentives. And so I don't know enough about what the administration is planning which of those three scenarios that's what I'd want to understand. Can I ask question? Uh he actually said that like there were some talks that Bill Aman who actually owns some share of Betty I think pennymac said that if it's privatized it will be the it be better for the US real estate market. Do you think like if it's privy privatized as it was before in 2008? Do you think there will be similar negative consequences that will happen or do you think it's a bit different now because the policies have changed? Yeah, I don't I don't know. I mean, I think it would also depend on if you have a situation where like in in going into 2008, there's a regulator that's supposed to be regulating them and making sure that they're not taking excessive risks. Uh I think that that regulator failed in their mission going into 2008 and they took much bigger risks than they appreciated. you'd have to solve the regulatory portion of this and make sure that that regulator was doing the right things so that they were not taking uh excessive risks. And so there's a lot of uh a lot of questions that I would need to answer. Thank you. Any other questions? Hi, I'm Epicroon here. Thank you very much for the very insightful discussions. I'm particularly impressed by your statement that policy makers should be very humble about the views on the economy because even behind a very simple event there are so many counteracting forces and uh but at the same time as a policy maker so that you know maybe the public would like to have a more clear and simple messages and uh so that how do you take the light balance between complexity of the reality and the simplicity of the explanation that's my question you You know, it's it's tough and I don't I don't think I always get it right. One thing that's very clear that we try to communicate is what are our goals. So, Congress has given us our goals. 2% inflation and maximum employment, as many Americans working as possible. And often times those things are they work together. Sometimes they're intention. And so then what we'll say is, okay, this is what we're trying to achieve. We were working on the last few years what we call the soft landing. Bringing inflation all the way back down, keeping the labor market strong. Everything's going quite well. Now we have these tariffs that's created a lot of uncertainty, probably pushing down economic activity, probably pushing up inflation. And so we're waiting and seeing. We're going to see how this shakes out. Where's the effect bigger and then we're going to move. I think speaking about things at that level, people can understand that and you know the the details of well the tariff is hitting an intermediate good and it's going to take a long time to flow through to final prices. I don't I think those those details matter to us and they matter to you. But I think ultimately to the to the public what they experience is is my job safe? Is inflation low? Is my family falling behind or are they getting ahead? I think those are the core things that we need to communicate as simply as we can, but it's it's not easy and we're not perfect at it certainly. Thank you. Any other questions, comments? Uh, thank you for coming to Ko University. I'm Masahiro and a faculty member at KO and my question is quite simple about the local economy uh in uh your fed minor and how how do you estimate the impact of the current uh president policy like trade policy or immigration policy on uh your local economy in the Minneapolis state? Uh yeah, in Minnesota state. Thank you so much. So um let me back up. I'm going to answer your question, but let me explain why there are 12 Federal Reserve banks in the US. This was a negotiation in Congress a 100 years ago where they didn't want the central bank all housed in Washington DC. They wanted it spread out around the country. So, the different regions of the country had a direct voice in monetary policy and the policy process. Now, ultimately, when I make a recommendation for interest rates, I'm not picking an interest rate that's customized for Minnesota. It has to be an interest rate for the United States as a whole. So, my recommendation is what do I think is right for the country as a whole, but it is somewhat informed by what we're seeing locally. So, I'll give you an example. We get lots of data on the US economy and on the global economy, and usually the data that we get is confusing. Some data shows strong growth, some data shows weak growth, some data is lagging, some data is forward, you know, futures, and it's it's a confused picture usually. So, how do you make sense of that? Well, how I make sense of that is I talk to a lot of businesses, small businesses, midsize businesses, large businesses. I talk to labor unions to say, "What are you actually experiencing on the ground? What's actually happening in your business?" And usually from those conversations I can start to make sense of the confl the conflicting data that we're getting and then that makes it clearer for me to make a recommendation for the US economy as a whole. And so um we don't it's it's not like we're trying to say well this is what inflation is in Minnesota. That doesn't matter that much. It more matters what does it tell us about inflation for America as a whole. Excellent. Thank you so much. Thank you. Yes, I saw a hand here. Um hello. I'm student in faculty of business and commerce. Thank you for um great opportunity. Um I have a one question that um I've heard the news that Moody's has downgraded the US government's credit rating as a last company of the biggest credit rating company. So um I just just by my curious um what do you think about the news and does it actually affects a lot to American economy? I don't know that the um the downgrades or the credit agencies themselves matter that much. I think the information that led to the downgrade matters more. And so, you know, there's a there's a question that we're all wrestling with right now, which is all around the world, advanced economy, long-term bond yields are going up, including in Japan a lot. Why is that? Why is it that now as opposed to six months ago, there's some reassessment going on, apparent reassessment going on on the fiscal position of all of these countries? What has changed? And so, yes, there's tariffs have changed and trade wars have changed, but has that all of a sudden made Japan's fiscal position more precarious? That that is not obvious to me. And so there's a lot of there's a lot of churn a lot of changes underneath this that I think we need to try to understand what has fundamentally changed leading to these yields to move. Um I you know the chair of the Fed Jerome Powell has said many many many times that the US is on an unsustainable fiscal path which is if you just forecast out where the debt and deficits in America are going they go way up. And six months ago, people would ask me, "Is America's debt to GDP, let's say 100% debt to GDP, is that concerning? How concerning is it?" And I would say many countries have gotten into trouble having 100% of debt to GDP, say Argentina. Japan has twice as much debt to GDP and seems to be fine. And I would say to them, is America more like Argentina or more like Japan? But now that Japan's yields are moving, maybe I shouldn't use that analogy anymore. U so I don't I don't know the answer is what yet is driving these this this ch reassessment. Is it a short-term reassessment? Is it a long-term reassessment? I don't know. It's going to go back to things like if the US economy's productivity picks up, it's been high for the last few years, then we should be generating more resources. We should have stronger growth. and then that could help us with our debt to GDP position. Maybe not. Maybe that's not going to happen. So, I don't have a good answer for you yet. It's not the downgrade that concerns me. It's these other factors that I think are uh we need to really pay attention to. Thank you, Martia. Uh I'm Omari. I'm visiting from UBC. I'm visiting KO for this month. Um I guess my question is about Fed communication. Um this 2% inflation target is well understood. You know, you know, at least in central banking circles and and technical circles is well understood. Um and yet when I do any armchair uh surveys of people there is complete confusion about the level of prices and the rate of change of prices and so and it has created almost every time I go to the US now because I'm living in Canada you ask people and say they lie prices are higher and these guys are telling me that uh you know inflation is down inflation is not down prices I'm paying this much I used to pay that much so this is about communication and it's a fundamental a challenge in some sense about uh uh so what is getting passed through how are people parsing data or what the fed is communicating about what they're seeing how do you see this challenge I mean is is this something that you know at least people are thinking about inside about communication and and this first moment second moment problem um and sort of related to that I'll just tag on one thing which is 2% uh as a so if I go to five and then I come down to two do I declare victory or should we be a targeting average 2% which would then mean I should go below what's the take yeah so it's a huge challenge and it's a huge challenge politically for the Fed it's a huge challenge for elected leaders for exactly the reason you said uh I have not heard a a solution to this problem I think the only solution is once we get inflation back down to 2% what's great about 2% at 2% nobody thinks about it. Nobody cares. I mean, they do care, but really it's just not a factor of their daily lives. I don't remember who said it. Was it Greenspan? Somebody like that a long time ago said the thing is about 2% inflation is people are not spending time in their daily lives thinking about how they have to plan for or adjust their behavior for these minor price changes. So, I think that's that's where we need to get to is get to the point where people are not thinking about it anymore. I don't know how to solve the specific problem that you've identified, which is correct. The difference between prices are higher. Stop telling me that you've solved the problem. Prices are still higher. Then related to the, you know, if we've overshot, do we want to undershoot the we went we're undertaking a every 5 years now, the Federal Reserve undertakes a review of our monetary policy framework, our approach to monetary policy. This is ongoing right now. I don't want to prejudge it, but in our 2020 framework review, we came up with something that we call flexible average inflation targeting, which basically means that hey, if we're at the zero lower bound, we're going to aim to try to catch up on the inflation on the upside, but if we have a period of high inflation, we're not going to try to cause deflation to catch up on the on the reverse. Um, and so that's a point of that was by design because deflation is very challenging and painful for economies. Um, and I'm I'm I'm confident we're not going to adopt a deflation strategy in our new one. Uh, but what the details are, we're still working through questions. Thank you very much for coming today. So my question is that to what extent does FOMC consider the stability of the falling exchange market and stability of what uh falling exchange for exchange marketing exchange market sorry um in terms of the dollars being the base currency of the war uh when deciding policy interest rate so we don't specifically target the dollar with our interest rate policy policy. We do have uh economists running models of the global economy and the global economy matters for America. So when we move interest rates, our models will tell us well we think that the dollar will move up or the dollar will move down that will have some imprint on inflation then that comes back to America. It'll also have an effect on economic growth around the world which then has an effect on America. So we do care about the global economy a lot but ultimately we are trying to achieve our 2% inflation and maximum employment for our domestic economy and these are feedback loops of how our policy choices might have unintended consequences ultimately that affect America. Thank you very much. Have any other questions? Uh hello. Thank you very much for your presentation so far. I have a question regarding expectations. So you've already mentioned that they're incredibly important to your work and there's a growing body of literature on how exactly expectations are formed. So thinking about selective memory recall or different cycles of updating of agents households consistently overshooting with the inflation expectations. So, how much is this already considered in your policy and especially um communication decisions at the Fed? Well, um you know, my colleague Andrea and our team of PhD economists will know infinitely more than I do about the literature that you spoke about. Um my humble view is that each episode seems a little bit different. you know what did we all take from you know I'll give you an example so I lived I was at the front line of the 2008 financial crisis and in the 2008 financial crisis one of the things we learned is when people got scared they ran to US Treasury bonds that's the source of safety and then when COVID hit they ran from every security you can imagine and they just wanted cold hard cash physical cash and in the US we literally almost had a run on cash where people were going to the bank and trying to withdraw as much cash as they possibly could and then in that moment the Federal Reserve had to intervene in the US Treasury market to stabilize the Treasury market. This is not exactly answering your question, but that's just an example of two crises in the moment, very different uh responses from people and behavior from people uh in a moment of fear, in a moment of panic. And so this goes to a debate that we're having right now, which is the US and many countries have had elevated inflation for four years. How many years can we go before inflation expectations unanchor lose their anchor? I don't know. And with all due respect to the researchers in the room, if you had a very sophisticated model who said it was 5.2 years, I'd say, you know, I'm skeptical of how much confidence I'm going to put in your model of 5.2 years. And so we, you said it right. How do people form expectations? How do how do societies form expectations? How do society's expectations change? This is a very inexact science that we're talking about here. And and we can we can examine with great academic rigor a specific case, but I'm going to be cautious before I draw firm conclusions about future events when the shock is going to be totally different. Thank you. Thanks very much for a great talk. Um, in Washington, especially in in Congress, is there a really clear realization of what you said about the relationship between the trade balance and financial inflows? I don't know. Uh, I don't know. I've been saying it. Uh, I gave a TV interview CNBC in the US and I said it just like I said it here and the anchor who's pretty sophisticated said, "Nobody's ever explained it like that before." And so, well, I think I think we should explain it like that. I think we have time for one more question. Um I have a short question regarding with a bricks country. There were many news relating to bricks country and they are uh planning to like create their own currency like bricks currency. Personally does it concern you? Thank you. It doesn't concern me. I mean ultimately what you're asking I think is uh the US dollar and the premium position that it has played in the global economy for decades and what is going to threaten that potentially and will there be a competitor and I always describe it this way the economy that has the reserve currency is the major economy that investors around the world have the most confidence in. And so one thing is other countries could improve their competitiveness. And so let's say if the dollar is here, other countries could improve their competitiveness and now let's say the euro becomes the reserve currency of the world. That's that's conceivable. Or the yen or alternatively America could weaken our own competitive position and then that similar shift could happen. So, I guess I'm less concerned about BRICS countries coming together and trying to create their own basket that's going to compete. Um, certainly I think, you know, China has enormous economic challenges that they're facing going forward. If America can get our political system kind of to come together and make some strategic decisions, I think America's competitive fundamentals are very, very strong. But we also can't take that for granted. And so I think America should focus on getting America right and then I think we'll be very competitive in the world. Thank you very much. So thank you so much for uh your your time. Um unfortunately it's the time's up so I will have to end here. Uh do you have any final remarks? Well thank you for really uh I wasn't sure what to expect from this conversation. Obviously, this is a highly informed, educated, sophisticated group. So, I really enjoyed the talk. He challenged me with a bunch of questions I don't normally get. I've gotten the Bitcoin question before. Uh, but many of the other questions were ones that, uh, made me think. So, I really appreciate it. I've had wonderful time in Japan. Unfortunately, have to go home tomorrow. Uh, but have a few more glorious Japanese meals between now and then. Uh, so I can't wait. Okay. Thank you so much. Uh please join me in thanking the president for his invaluable time and the excellent experience that we had today. Thank you so much. Thank you very much.