https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/Neel-Kashkari-at-the-University-of-Minnesotas-College-of-Science-and-Engineering

A conversation with Neel Kashkari at the University of Minnesota’s College of Science and Engineering

April 24, 2025

Minneapolis, Minnesota

Neel Kashkari

Good afternoon everyone and thank you all for coming. Um my name is Jane Lancing. I am a uh proud University of Minnesota civil engineering alumni and um I'm also chair of the deans advisory board for the college of science and engineering and like many of you I'm sure an enthusiastic supporter of the college of science and engineering which impacts the lives of motans and beyond. Um we want to welcome the students, faculty, alumni and friends to innovating the future perspectives on science, engineering and the economy. I am looking forward to the candid conversation with Andrew Elene the college of science and engineering dean and his distinguished guest Neil Kashkari, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minne of Minneapolis as they explore the interplay of science and engineering. How science and engineering fuel the economic growth with macroscale economic understanding. We are thrilled to host this event in person uh the at the North Auditorium Twin Cities campus and virtually uh via liveream. Our program will begin with presubmitted questions followed by ample time for questions from our in-person audience. I am now honored to introduce the College of Science and Engineering Dean Andrew G. Alen. He has served as dean since January 2022 and is the college's chief executive and academic officer. He provides collaborative leadership to enhance the college's excellence as a global leader in research and education. Before coming to Minnesota, he was professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana Champagne, where he served in various leadership roles, including associate dean for research and director of a multi-university university research center funded by the National Science Foundation. Dean Leen has received numerous professional awards and in 2023 he was elected to the National Academy of Engineering, one of the highest honors for an engineer. Dan Leen holds a PhD and a master's degree in mechanical engineering from the University of California at Berkeley and an undergraduate degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering from Princeton. Please welcome Dena Leen. [Applause] So thank you. Can you hear me? Okay. Is the mic on? All right. Well, thanks for that very warm welcome, uh, Jane. Um, uh, and thanks to all of you for joining us, uh, this this afternoon, evening, um, despite the weather. Um, special thanks to those who are joining us remotely as well, too. And I am excited and and and just delighted to introduce a distinguished guest, Neil Kashkari. Um so you know as a faculty member it's it's always rewarding uh when your students go on to to basically surpass you um and have a very positive impact on society. So Neil was in the first uh and third classes I ever taught um in my career. I remember M240 and M336 and he sat right in the middle not on the front not in the back not on the right in the middle. always had good questions and it was clear that he was going to be a leader uh from then. Um I've followed his path uh remotely uh over the years and I must say that my prognostications were correct. Um so Neil uh is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, one of the Fed's 12 uh regional banks. And the Minneapolis Fed uh serves the public by pursuing a growing economy that works for all of us. Uh and the bank's district include uh Minnesota, the Dakotas, uh Montana, Northwestern Wisconsin, the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. So, uh Neil also serves as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets the nation's monetary policy. Um he got two degrees, uh in mechanical engineering, but began his career in an aerospace uh uh uh field developing technology for NASA space missions. Uh he later held a variety of roles in uh public service and finance um uh quite notably as the assistant secretary of the treasury during the 2008 financial crisis where he oversaw the troubled asset relief program TARP. Um Neil lives with his wife, two young children, and a new funand dog in Arono, Minnesota. So please join me in welcoming Neil Keshkari. So as I was reading this, you know, I was thinking, so you started off as a mechanical engineer, then you went to work uh for NASA as an aerospace engineer. How do you go from where you started to where you are today? Like that's not the traditional path for science and engineering students. Like how did you get there? What was your path? Sure. So uh first of all, thanks for inviting me here. Uh when I saw Andrew was announced as the new dean here at the University of Minnesota, I couldn't have been more excited. Uh let me just just give you one second of background. Uh he made a big impression on me when I was an undergraduate student and a grad student. Uh so wow, this young professor, you're a brand new professor. Uh really seems genuinely interested in his students. And I remember that it made a big impression on me. So I was really excited when I saw you come here and uh thrilled to reconnect with you after all this time. I was working for a contractor for NASA, what was then TRW is now north of Grumman in Roondo Beach, California. I loved it. Absolutely loved it. I was doing research in the basement. I would come in to run my experiments at 2 o'clock in the morning because the vibrations were less in the building. Um, and I needed to have very stable environment to run my dynamic experiments of some of these little latches that we were creating for what became the James Webb Space Telescope. This was the work that was part of that. Now, let me back up. I was a mosquito on a giant project. Let me just level set. Nonetheless, it was very exciting for a young engineer to be part of something and to have some appreciation for the scale and audacity of what they were trying to do. But my managers were encouraging me. I was doing well. My managers were encouraging me to get my PhD. And I knew that if I got my PhD that I would be committing my career. Like that's a big investment to go get your PhD. I'd be committing my career to this. And as much as I loved it, I was not ready to make that type of a commitment at that point. and I decided to go get my MBA. No, don't throw eggs at me. Uh I decided to go get my MBA uh to explore the business world and see what that would lead to. Um I I remember I was just uh telling somebody when I chose to leave engineering, I made a conscious decision. I said, I'm probably never going to find work that is as intellectually rewarding as what I'm doing right now. Because it was like you're doing something that nobody had ever done before. And that was very, you know, it just it just pulled on your sense of innovation and curiosity. Um, and that was true like when I went into investment banking, uh, until I found my way into public policy because there's a lot of parallels between public policy and engineering in the sense that you're trying to solve problems and you're not sure how to solve problems. And so anyway, we'll talk more about that, but I went and I got my MBA and then I went into banking and then went into, it's a longer story, went into government and whatnot. Well, we're very glad that you did. Well, thank you. I'm probably better at this than I was as an engineer. Some people may say that's really scary on both fronts, but Oh, no. No. Um uh so so I was wondering for those of us who u don't follow the the Fed um you know could you provide an overview of its mission and and the impact that it has and you know has the role of the Fed stayed the same over time or is it sort of changed uh with the times give us a sense so the Fed is our nation's central bank uh we are the third central bank of the United States Alexander Hamilton created the first bank it lasted about 20 years and there was a second bank. Uh Andrew Jackson got rid of it. Uh Americans hated the idea of having a central bank because it sounded nefarious. A bunch of bankers in a dark room doing god knows what. But then the United States economy was hammered by depressions and banking crises in the late 1800s and then a really big one, the banking panic of 1907. And then Congress said, "Well, gosh darn it, I guess we need to have a central bank that when it when a crisis hits the economy, the central bank is able to provide credit into the economy to cushion the blow." And so they created something unique in America. They created the board of governors in Washington DC. You've probably heard of our chair Jerome Powell. Before Jerome Powell was Janet Yellen and Ben Bernani and Alan Greenspan and they created 12 independent Federal Reserve banks, the ninth of which is here. So they wanted the regions of the country, they didn't want all the power concentrated in Washington DC or New York. They wanted the regions of the country to be directly represented in the policy process. So our jobs at the Minneapolis Fed are to represent this region that you talked about, which is a big geographic region and make sure that what's happening in our economy is part of the deliberative process. So I go back to Washington DC every six weeks. We set interest rates for the nation. We can't set a different interest rate for Minnesota and for California. It's one monetary policy for the country. But my job is to make sure that this region and what's happening here is part of that deliberation. We do a lot of other stuff. You know, we if you go to your ATM and you get cash out of your ATM, that cash would have started out in our vault. Uh we supervise banks. We do other things. We do a bunch of stuff. But at its core, the central bank is to provide liquidity into the economy to manage some of the up some of the ups and downs of the economic cycles and to try to avoid, you know, keep keep a downturn, make it only a recession and not a depression. And when the financial crisis hit in '08, the Fed was a big part of that. When COVID hit in 2020, the Fed was a big part of that. So in those times of big shocks, the Fed comes in often comes in with force. Cool. Thank you. Thank you. Um so I'm curious, you talk about like you know interest rates and and and and and uh setting policy and sort of very like largecale macroeconomic um activities. So for us scientists and engineers, it would be useful to get your opinion like how you see science and engineering uh contributing to macroscale economic growth um across the world but but particularly here in the US. Well, economic growth comes from two things. It comes from population growth and productivity growth. That's it. And so population growth is you have more people producing things and more people consuming things. And then productivity growth is we can do more with the same resources that we have. The pi gets bigger on a per capita basis. Like if you just add more people, the pie will get bigger, but the pi per capita won't necessarily get any bigger. But if you have productivity growth, that science and engineering and knowledge development, then we become more productive and the pie gets bigger and each of our share of the pie hopefully gets bigger too. So for the long-term trends in the economy, science, technology, I mean economic strength comes from innovation. If you think about if I read a lot of history, you think about over the course of world history, which economies have been strongest, which economies have been more most competitive, which countries have been strongest, it's those that have the biggest sources of innovation. Um, I mean, it's it's actually fascinating. If you go back to the Civil War and you compare the economy of the Union versus the the economy of the Confederacy, the Union was a raging innovation center. And the Confederacy had slavery and agriculture. And slavery was horrible for a thousand different reasons. And they had an economy based on slavery and agriculture. Their entire economic model was we need more land and we need more slaves. That was their economy. In the north, they had technology development. They had railroads. They had the telegraph. It was a completely different country, a completely different economy. And so if and go to World War II, uh the US won World War II in part because we had this extraordinary innovation engine. They call it the arsenal of democracy that was able to create this not only create these armaments to defeat the Nazis, but be able to grow the economy so rapidly that the sacrifices the American people had to make while they're funding the military were very modest compared to every other country because of our innovation. So, uh, if you think about long-term success of societies, science, innovation, I mean, they're not the only things that matter, but they're really important. Okay, that's that's great. And I agree 100% but I'm biased. Um, if I could sort of dig a little deeper and now I'm again um revealing a little bit. If I remember correctly, you were actually on the solar vehicle team. I was. Yes, I I remember that. Um, back at Illinois uh boy 30 something years ago now. Um, and and you know, Minnesota uh we have a solar vehicle team um here as well too. Very proud of that. It's one of the top ones in the in the uh world. Um and u that's partly, you know, we're really known for activity in sustainability, solar power, wind, things like that. So thinking of things like solar, wind, possibly nuclear, um you know, other types of energy, you know, how do you see the long-term future of energy and its impact on economic policy in the US? I mean, should we advocate for cheaper energy, more sustainable even though it might cost a little bit more? Both a mix? Um, boy, it's a tough question. I mean, if you think about, first of all, the fact that in the last 10 years, the United States has become much less reliant on foreign sources of energy has provided us economic resilience. That's that's indisputable. That's absolutely true and and important. And given all the geopolitical dynamics that have been going on over the last 10 years, that's been a real source of strength for us in terms of having some level of security. Um, so that's one thing that I would say uh more resilience. Number two, I think lots of sources of different types of energy makes us more so I'm looking at through the lens of an economic policy maker and how do we have an economy that is resilient? the more diverse sources of energy we have, the less vulnerable we are if what if there's a disruption any one of those sources. So, diversity of sources I think is important. If you think about climate change, and I'm not a climate scientist, uh we need technology, massive technology breakthroughs to address this. You know, us turning up our thermostats or turning down our thermostats depending on the season is not going to make any difference unless we can get the rest of the world to go along. And the only way we get the rest of the world to go along is we say it's cleaner and cheaper. Other countries have said, developing countries have said we are not going to spend more money to slow this down. You didn't do it. You didn't spend more money when you were developing. We're not going to spend more money now. So we have to develop, you all have to develop technologies that are both cleaner and cheaper so that there's no sacrifice that's being asked. Now, that's not a, you know, maybe you're not going to like me saying that, but I think that's the reality of what we're facing. And so, you know, pioneering all, you know, all forms of technology development to figure out where's the breakthrough going to come from, what's going to be that miracle that is both cheaper uh and cleaner. You know, you can't I always say to people when I was at Treasury back in 2006 doing a bunch of work on alternative energy because my boss, the Treasury Secretary, cared a lot about alternative energy and the environment and we'd meet with Department of Energy and they had lists of technologies of their favorite technologies. And I remember somebody commented that whatever's on your list is probably wrong, right? Because when they were looking for a replacement for whale oil, electricity was not on anybody's list, right? And that's just the nature of scientific breakthroughs. Scientific breakthroughs are really hard. You need to plant a thousand flowers and hope that a few of them bloom. And you can't predict which one's going to bloom. And I guess that's part of our job here is to yeah try and make some of those flowers bloom. Um so so and and the Fed doesn't go ahead and develop the technology, but but you know certainly um you you utilize the tech technologies. Um and I'm sort of you know there have been lots of technological advances um over the last 20 plus years a lot around u information um transmission gathering um computation so I'm curious like how does the Fed take advantage of these you know computing AI uh uh u communications in in their sort of day-to-day operations and sort of like a sub questions like why why can't you just make a giant AI model of the economy Well, we'd love to uh so we use lots of tools. Uh we have a brilliant team of PhD economists that work very closely with economists at the University of Minnesota and they've utilized big data to try to we get data sets that we didn't have access to before and maybe we can learn things by bringing a lot of computation power against these big data sets. So that all is happening to try to make us smarter. We also partner with uh private sector firms that are coming up with new tracking of consumer behavior and we're always examining them. Maybe they give us more insight into where inflation is going. So, we're always innovating to try to get better at forecasting the economy. Um I joked with some of our economists that uh the thing about our economic models that we have and we got brilliant models is the one thing you can be confident of is they're going to be wrong 100% of the time. 100% of the time. because there's so many things happening in the economy, you have to simplify the economy enough, but you know, one of your simplifying assumptions is going to end up being the wrong simplifying assumption, but you just don't know in advance which one is going to be the wrong simplifying assumption. Uh, you know, if you go back, we missed, you're probably aware of this, we missed the big inflation surge that happened after COVID, like a lot of us, and myself included, said, "Hey, we think it's going to be transitory," meaning temporary. It ended up being much higher than we expected and much longer lived than we expected. Why did we miss it? We missed it because our workhorse economic models developed over decades have taught us that inflation comes from two things. It comes from a very tight labor market. Businesses competing with each other to find workers, paying up wages that then gets passed on to customers. And it comes from inflation expectations becoming unanchored. What that means is if you and I all now believe high inflation is the new normal, we all adjust our behavior in a way that makes that high inflation more likely to actually happen. Well, those are the way that inflation gets generated. So, we were laser focused looking at those signals. Those signals were not flashing red. And then supply chains got gummed up and we had a new source of inflation that we had not seen in any of our lifetimes. So, that's why we missed it. This happens all the time. You know, it's like we keep saying, well, the great financial crisis was a one in a 100 event and COVID was a one in aundred event and we keep having these one in a 100 events. They're different one in aundred events, but they really make modeling the economy exceptionally difficult. So, there's a and that that's fascinating. I mean there's just like a standard uh quip um uh that you know if you have a model um and you have your data and the model doesn't match the data which do you believe and the engineering joke is well it depends if you're an experimentalist or a theorist [Music] um I'll leave that one with with with you. Um so so to to be able to make sense of all of these different types of uh you know complex like you're saying models or understanding different sorts of inflation trying to figure out like some of the new things it's really hard I would anticipate for um uh an individual to know everything um uh and so I would assume that that you know you have to put together teams and So, Minnesota, one of the things we're very proud of, brag points, for those of you who didn't know, um I think earlier this year, late last year, we were ranked as the top university, public university in the world for interdisciplinary research. That's something we do very well here. Um uh so I'm curious, um and it's because we go after some of these big hairy problems that it's really tough to know yourself just as an individual how to go after these. Um, uh, I'm curious for like the Fed, like how do you different disciplines inside the Fed come together to address some of the types of challenges that you might have? I mean, I'm assuming you have like political science, business, maybe some well, STEM people, um, economist. How do you put together teams um, to to address these for monetary policy? It really happens at the highest level which is the Federal Open Market Committee which is the Federal Open Market Committee is made up of there 12 reserve bank presidents and then there are seven governors uh of in Washington and there's a mix of a lot of PhD economists there a couple um I'm an engineer uh Pat Harker the Philly Fed the now retiring Philly Fed president was a operations engineer PhD um you've got business practitioners and you've got bankers so there's a mix there it's not as diverse as you might want, but there's actually quite a bit of diversity there. Once you go a layer down into that and you're into our research departments, it really is dominated by PhD economists. And then you've got macroeconomists and labor economists and whatnot. And so, um, that that diversity of thought happens more at the more senior levels. And you know, if you came in and you met with me and our research department of PhD economists, uh, our policy debates are like intellectual wrestling matches in a in a very positive way. I mean, nobody's yelling at each other, but it's we're really challenging each other because I walk into those that room knowing I don't know the answer, but also knowing that they don't know the answer and they know that I know that they don't know the answer. So, you know, let's all set our egos aside and let's just look at the data and let's roll up our sleeves and let's try to figure out what are the ways we could explain what we're observing. Cool. So, if somebody wanted to get into that um like for individuals with technology backgrounds, if they wanted to move into the policym or financial sectors, um and they came to you and said, "All right, you know, this is what I want to do. How should I prep for it? Should I should I go go work at NASA and TRW or or you know, should I You know, I didn't know anything about this until I went to Washington. So, I would say if somebody's interested in the policy arena and you have a technical background one, you could look at the agencies of government, so Department of Energy or whatnot, uh, EPA that are doing related work. There might be opportunities directly there. Another or Department of Defense, etc. Another place are there are many congressional committees of relevant jurisdictions. So there's an energy committee for example uh if you want to go work on energy policy issues and they have a professional staff that supports that committee. Uh so the members of Congress might turn over but there can be more continuity in some cases on some of the professional staff. So there are actually and then there are think tanks that do work around these areas uh as well. So there are many avenues for people who want to get involved in the policy arena where you can bring your technical expertise to bear and help tackle help analyze really important public policy issues for the country. Cool. Cool. Um thanks and and you know for those of you thinking about that um uh thank you in advance for your service because it is really really valuable some of the ideas that come out of there they actually do go on to shape how we operate in this in this in this country. um the the so uh want to start off sort of again a macro level a little bit and then come down to your perspective. It was a little bit disappointing to me like when I was actually looking at at uh poll numbers in terms of how the rest of the country sort of sees you know higher ed. Um I I think there was a a Gallup poll that said that the confidence in higher ed in the US had dropped from 57% in 2015 to 36% in 2023 which was a record low. Um now given the decline in public confidence in higher education. Um what's your perspective on the value of higher education particularly in the STEM fields? I mean I'm biased too. Never been more valuable and only increasing in value. If you look, there's a lot of anxiety some people have about AI and what it's going to do to the workforce. I'm strongly bullish on labor. When automation was brought into agriculture, people said, "Oh, the end of labor." Was not the end of labor. Labor shifted. Now, those disruptions can be challenging for the individuals directly affected. No question. But, you know, long road ahead for labor. I think that's going to continue to be true. But as technology has continued to penetrate our economy, the need for workers to have skills has continued to increase. So to me, the value of education has never been higher, especially in technical related fields. Uh never been higher. I think the challenge for us from a public policy perspective is how do we give that worldclass education to more of our young people without just saying well the answer is more debt. That's not an answer. That is not a scalable solution. And so how do we find scalable solutions to educate more of our young people? That's the challenge for all of you. Challenge accepted. Um agree 100%. Um and you know when you go through some of the disruptions like one of the ones that that I hear a lot is uh about AI um and will it disrupt um not just uh sort of the service sector but possibly even the the computer science field um now you sort of need just a few experts and you don't need as many uh folks that are banging out code because that can be done by AI. Um, now what do you think about sort of this AI discourse that's going on? Is it is it like the the the the agricultural machinery where this is just sort of a natural evolution or are we truly at sort of a an apocalyp event for for Yeah, I I don't buy the uh apocalyptic predictions. Um, you know, Phil Silicon Valley, God bless them, they do a lot of great innovation, but they also make some ridiculous predictions, most of which are wrong. Um, you know, five years ago they told us that self-driving trucks were right around the corner and all the longhaul truck drivers were doomed. Five years later we're no closer to that reality than we were five years ago. I mean, I think eventually it'll come to pass, but it's not nearly as rapid as they like to say. Uh, and I think there's going to be even even if computer programming becomes much more efficient in terms of what one skilled programmer can do, great. That programmer can now generate so much more code and be so much more productive. And so uh again it's going to be changing and disruptive. I use AI tools. I mean I I find just in terms of my search queries what I would used to go to Google for I now go to Grock for and it is so much better than I mean it's extraordinary how much better it is in terms of getting me quick information that I'll give you just a silly example. I gave a um a toast for my colleague Pat Harker at the Philadelphia Fed who's retiring and I wanted to see if an AI tool could summarize Pat Harker's monetary policy contributions. So I went into chat GPT and Gemini and Grock and only Grock could do this and I said go into the transcripts from the Federal Open Market Committee. So when we deliberate five years later a transcript is released publicly. I gave it a link to where I could find the transcripts. I said, "Go into the transcripts and give me a synopsis of Pat Harker's monetary policy contributions." It did it in minutes and it was right. I mean, one or two words here or there were wrong, but it was so and it compared his contributions to other members of the committee and it was right. Then it it made some references that, you know, Pat likes to make a joke here or there. Made some reference to his humor and I said, "Give me an analysis of Pat Harker's humor." And it gave me an analysis of Pat Harker's humor. For me to have done that would have taken me I would I wouldn't have done it. I mean it would have taken me hours and hours and hours of work and it did it like that and it was right. That's extraordinary. Wow. H I'm wondering what like I didn't do it for myself. I was going to say for me and I'm thinking like what rock say if they put it. Okay. So, uh, the future is what it is, but let's not get too carried away on the the the the hype on this. All right. I don't know. What do you think? Fair enough. Uh, similarly, that's a great question. Um, um, I'll give you the cards here. You know, um, the the the the I AI. Um, and we I I saw this coming. My background is in the controls area. Um uh and so back in the '9s we were looking at neuroletes for decision-making. You you train them to take a set of inputs and spit out some outputs that you could use as a decision decision-m tool. Um uh and so AI I see it as sort of an evolution. Um there's not um something to fear or anything like that. Um uh for the last 40 years uh information and the knowledge economy has continued to progress. Um uh we've gotten much better at being able to transmit information. I mean the telegraph you're talking about earlier. I mean that's how we used to transmit information before that was a letter right and then we got telephones. Okay. Um uh now we can move you know gigabits of information around in milliseconds. Um similarly computation we used to be able to do you know so many calculations and and you've just seen that that that steady rise as a function of time. AI it is at its core it's kind of sort of like Excel right um you you got a table you got put you put some things in and you run a algorithm and you'll spit out some answers um yes it might be able to predict certain things about whether that is a cat or a cow or a person in the street but that's all based on um uh analysis of information and and crunching a lot of data I I don't see this uh stopping I do see this as a natural progression and we'll become better and better and and we'll start to adapt. the big thing, the the the the phase change I think a little bit was things, well, apart from the transformer and the ability to go ahead and and and be able to better with some of these large language models, um um there's still a bunch of other types of of of models that that that that underpin the general MLAI, but the computation became a lot cheaper. Um um um and you you cross a threshold at which you can actually start to to to to make some of those decisions in a reasonable amount of time on a reasonable hardware. Like I think a lot of the stuff that you can do now with your um uh uh cell phone, I mean if you had enough information, you could do those back in the 90s. It's just it would be really really expensive on a lot of very expensive hardware. So I see this as a path. I don't see it as reason to fear it. Um um and we're just going to keep going down that path uh with greater and greater information flow and the ability to to to to make decisions with larger and larger sets of information. That's that's my personal personal opinion. Um um so you know you've obviously seen a lot. Um, are there any sort of macroeconomic trends that you can think of that are most pressing that you can sort of see might affect us as a society or a state um the university even down to our our our college levels? Are there things that you're starting to see? And we're not asking for any sort of, you know, inside information, but just sort of general things you can pick out. Um, uh, and these could be either other than current events. Well played. Well played. Well played, sir. Well played. Well played. Um uh yes. Yes. Other than current um uh and even the current events um uh I don't see that as a structural shift in I remember talking to somebody about sort of again division and and being divided as society and um bemmoning the fact how divided we are. and this former deputy governor for un for for not university for state of Maryland. Um we were at a meeting. She said, "Oh, she's much senior than I am. Uh oh, young um person, sit down and let me give you an education on what the 1960s were like." Um and proceeded to go ahead and tell me how divided the country was um during the Vietnam War. Um with um um lessons that and specific examples that made you go, "Oh, ah, okay. Yes, we've gone through these. Um, uh, so I I I I see that the division here is something, you know, um, uh, might be a little bit temporary. I'm thinking more like things like, um, you know, is energy actually becoming cheaper? Um, um, are supply chains becoming much more interconnected? Um, um, that's a macroeconomic trend. Um, uh, birth rates, um, are they dropping everywhere? Um, what does that mean for for us as a society? Aging. Um u those are some that I think about and the other thing I think about and that's why I'm really curious your perspective are those risks to us or are they opportunities or they both? Yeah. Well, the birth rate one is something that's dominant in ma most macroeconomic modeling of how economies perform and it's happening in advanced economies all around the world and in some some developing economies like China. Uh, I mean, China has this, you probably know this, has this extraordinarily negative demographic profile, uh, driven in large part by their one child policy, which they didn't realize what it was going to do to their society forward, you know, 30, 40, 50 years. It's extraordinary. Um, Japan has faced this longer than most other advanced economies. Europe is further ahead than we are. We've been marginally better having more uh, per capita children than other other of our peer societies. But we've been able to augment that with immigration and that's not available to many countries. It's not really available to China culturally. It's not available to Japan culturally. And so they're, you know, they've been trying to bribe their families to have more babies. Literally, here's a, you know, here's a tax credit. Go have more babies. Doesn't work, by the way. It's like people decide not to do it. It's not about It's not about money. It's about a lot of other things. It's not about money. And so when you have this aging society and you're not having uh children to replace you, it leads to all sorts of challenges for the economy. Economic growth, uh funding of entitlement programs, whether it's Medicare or Social Security or their equivalent programs, huge challenge. So the demographics are very are a big big deal. And if you know, I'm going to be an optimist now. If we can get our immigration system sorted out in America, uh then it's an extraordinary tool. It has been an extraordinary tool for us over our history. It can be an it can be an extraordinary tool for us again. Um but it's a political challenge and we have to somehow get through the politics and here here as as as an immigrant um I can attest to the fact that you know it does open up a lot of opportunities both for the individual as well as for hopefully the country as well too. Um, so, uh, uh, a last question on the sort of scripted session, then we'll sort of open it up, um, to the audience. I didn't realize this was a scripted session, but that's good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm reading my my AI is feeding. Exactly. Exactly. Um, and this is one that I've been asked before. Um, and at various points in time, I've struggled what to say. Like, so I'm I'm curious to know what you'd say. Um like if you were looking at a 18 to 22 year old Neil Kashkari, right? Uh and they had their whole life ahead of them, right? What what guidance would you be able to give them? And let's just say they were going into engineering because most of these folks here are scientists or engineers. Um um you know, what what kind of advice would you give them professionally? um uh maybe personally in terms of like facing a a world that's going to change like that. I guess uh I mean what I would give the advice to Neil Young Neil Kashkari is don't do so much stupid but I wouldn't give that advice generally speaking. So generally speaking I would say uh this is not earthshattering. Pursue things that you are most interested in. If it's intellectually curious to you and you're genuinely interested you are more likely to apply yourself fully and you're more likely to be successful doing it. And be willing to take risks. uh one of the things that I've done throughout my career and I don't mean like physical risks although I do some of that um I mean taking career risk where you are there's there's enorm especially for young people there's enormous uh momentum by what your peers are doing if all of your peers are doing something like you feel this enormous pressure that that must be the right thing to do and I need to go do that too and the key moments in my career is when I've said, "No, no, no. I understand everybody's going and doing that. I'm not doing that. I'm I'm making a very different choice." Um, when I left engineering to go get my MBA, I mean, my manager's like, "Wait, you're supposed to go get your PhD." And I said, "I got it. I hear you, but I'm going to go explore a different world." And that was a risk that was really unorthodox for all of my peers as young engineers in in the aerospace field at the time. Or those who did get their MBA, you know, didn't they they kept working and got it part-time. And I said, "No, no, no, no. If I'm really going to explore this, I got to leave engineering and I got to go full-time to a top MBA program to really open doors and see what else is out there." U when I left Goldman Sachs to go to Treasury, my people around me are like, "Are you nuts? You're going to go, you're going to leave your career, you're doing well at Goldman Sachs to go take a staff job at the Treasury Department. That's nuts." And I said, "You're nuts. You know, you don't get it. This is an extraordinary chance for me to learn something totally new." So, um, I don't know. I just I found that there were enormous forces trying to keep me on the track and it took a little bit of courage for me to say, "Nah, I hear you. I understand what you're saying. I'm not going to do that. I'm going to do something different." So, I'd say two things and we're very very grateful that you did. Oh, thank you. Uh yes. Yes. Very happy. So, we we have some time now um uh from the audience. Uh a little open Q&A. Try and keep your questions brief. We've got a couple of mic runners here. Um uh Megan and Justin. So, is there a question? Just raise your hand. Um, question for him, by the way, not for me. Uh, questions for him. Hi, good evening. Uh, also, uh, may I join the Illinois reunion? I did my undergrad at UI. Wonderful. Um, so actually I arrived at this completely. I'm a math guy from first principles control theory actually. So, this is a question if you can answer it, appreciate it. Is there a possibility that if tariffs reconstitute the flow of capital into America that would put an upward pressure on the neutral rate for the Fed? Well, uh yeah. Yes. So, let me explain the gentleman's question. Uh why do we have a trade deficit? This is economic math. We have a trade deficit because investors around the world have decided that America is the best place to invest. So any country that is the premier place to invest and the capital flows in the math works that that country will have a trade deficit. And how does the that premier you hear about American exceptionalism in economics this is what it this is part of what it means. So if capital is flowing into America then on average we're going to have lower interest rates because interest rates are set by the balance between savings and investment. So we want to invest this much, but everybody wants to pour their savings into America, the interest rates that we borrow at will be lower. So if we're now going to change that so we no longer have a trade deficit, so that we no longer are the singular premier destination for capital, less capital will be flowing into America, the interest rate will go up and the neutral rate that balances the economy will be higher. So yes, that's to answer your question. Thanks. I was this is completely from first principles math and control theory. So I'm very happy to have it informed by you. Good. Well, it's a very good question. So well done. uh do you see the Fed will have a role in the innovation or and also like in the cryptocurrency for example creating a platform also creating regulations uh what was the first part where role in innovation the the crypto so you know we we the only role that we directly have in innovation is if we try to manage the ups and downs of the economic cycles and it provides more stability for you and for businesses to do their best work and to innovate as opposed to if we did a lousy job and we're having deep recessions or depressions then that can really be disruptive to these investment plans. So I think that's our biggest contribution is some level of economic stability so that you all can invest and innovate for the long term in terms of cryptocurrency. While I'm strongly bullish, as we talked about, on AI, crypto's now been around for 10 or 15 years. And the truth is, other than as an instrument of speculation, it's basically useless in an advanced economy. It's just a toy. It's like an instrument of you want to bet it's going to go higher and you're going to bet somebody else will buy from you higher, so go ahead and bet. The only use case is getting around regulation. So, we have bank regulations that banks are subjected to. Some people use crypto, Bitcoin to circumvent bank regulations, but as an actual legal I mean a as a productive use case for society, it's been 15 years and it hasn't been demonstrated yet. And I keep asking all the crypto enthusiasts to explain it to me and basically it's a bunch of hot air that they come back to me with. So, you know, we'll see if something useful comes out of it. But in terms of regulating crypto, uh, Congress is up ultimately up to Congress who are debating possible legislative scenarios for creating a a regulatory framework around crypto. That would be up to Congress. Your comment seems to contradict with our president. President question over there. There's a runner with the mic. Oh, there's Okay, I'm happy to go next. Neil, thank you for all what you've been doing. I'm a huge fan of yours since your dark days and I've been like following you since then. Uh my question is since you said you're optimist, what is the most optimistic thing that can happen to our economy over the next year? uh if there's a resolution of trade disputes with our major trading partners that would relieve extraordinary uncertainty that businesses and people large and you know businesses large and small and people across the country are experiencing right now. I've said this publicly that the last two months has been the biggest negative downturn in confidence in our economy since I've been at the Fed almost 10 years except for March of 2020 when COVID hit. It's that big a deal. And the thing about confidence is if we all get nervous at the same time and we say, you know what, I'm not going to take my family on that vacation. I'm not going to splurge. I'm not going to renovate my house. Or businesses say, I'm not going to hire those extra workers or or build that factory. If we all do that at the same time, it can really bring down the economy, really slow it down. Um and so if there are resolutions to these trade frictions, uh hopefully quickly, uh it could relieve that and that would be relative upside, uh relieving some of that uncertainty that we're experiencing right now. Sorry, it's hard to see you. The lights are very bright. So we were like looking at shadows with respect to modeling that you are saying we have our our modeling has not been complete and for us to make a correct decision is the technology of big data when we have huge set of data now because every modeling that we have used we use sample of our real reality real model real data actually because of the competition issue because of the space issue. But now that we have the technology allows and we can use big data, is that possible that our future model be more complete? I hope so. I'm skeptical. Uh just because the global economy is so complicated. You know what data set would you have had that would have told you that CO's going to hit the global economy? What data set would you have had that would have told you that we're gonna have this major trade war? Um, and it's it's a little bit like this is I don't know my the economists I work with may not like me making this comparison. It's a little bit like forecasting the weather, but atmospheric scientists have massive models. They have supercomputers. They have satellites. They can tell you next June the average weather in Minnesota is probably going to be 65 degrees. and they can tell you nothing about the weather on June 7th or almost nothing about the weather on June 7th. And so June 7th of 2026. So um when is the when is our our weather forecasting going to get good enough to be able to tell you what the weather's going to be like on a given day a year from now? There just so many things happening at the same time that are hard to capture. You know, can we do better? Yes, we're going to keep trying to do better. But ultimately we at every meeting that we have at the FOMC, we get data from the economy that is sending us mixed signals. Is the economy going up? Is it going down? Is inflation going up? Is inflation going down? And ultimately, we talk to a lot of businesses and labor groups and workers. And then we use judgment to try to figure out what's the signal from this conflicting data that we're getting all the time. You don't mind? I have one more quick one. Just hold the mic close to your mic. Yeah. Uh with respect to uh services that we provide and the deficit and supply and and uh all the services that we provide to imports basic export rather they are outside of the discussion that we have these days with respect to deficit. Why don't they why because we don't have deficit in the services that we are providing to the uh to hemisphere. So why don't government don't discuss the non deficit or uh that we have on the on the service side? Yeah, it's really um it's I don't mean to pun it's really a political question and I don't mean partisan politics but in our political system there are types of work that get a lot of political attention. So say manufacturing gets a lot of attention amongst both sides of the aisle. And if you look at manufacturing in America over time, we've become fabulously efficient in manufacturing, but the number of people we have doing the manufacturing has declined because that efficiency has come from technology and from automation. And so that sector right now in this moment has captured a lot of attention more than other sectors of the economy. I think we could say the same for agriculture too. That's true. Absolutely. Absolutely. One of the interesting things too follow on on the the question that was asked here about the models and and the long run accuracy it it seems like you know even if we had really really complicated models many of these they're not very well conditioned. So small perturbations in particular initial conditions or whenever you start can take you to such widely disparate um uh solutions that that long run accuracy is very very hard to get. Even if you had the exact right model, you know, like a like a like a precision, you know, if I ran at a 8 bit instead of 16 bit or something like that, it would be enough to throw me off and put me in a completely different set, which sort of fundamentally makes it hard uh to to to represent in our in our workhorse economic models that we use for the economy. And these are state-of-the-art. It's very difficult to generate a recession. Even though recessions happen, like you have to force the model by tweaking a bunch of variables to generate a recession by adding a bunch of nonlinear effects in there to get it to happen. We know recessions happen. And yet the models at their core mean revert. And they mean revert in a pretty elegant way. And it's like, okay, I'm pretty sure the world is not going to be as elegant as the model is saying. That doesn't mean the models aren't helpful. They help us think about trade-offs and different scenarios. but you just know that it's not going to be right. Um I'm a new grad engineer and then um ever since I graduate so like for the last two years I've seen um a current trend of technology companies laying offs. So you see waves of lays off happening from Google to Microsoft to like the big leading companies. Um and it decreased the job stability and security to a lot of people as well. So because we're talking about the future, how do you see like as like the position of like a policy maker what this chain is going towards? Is there going to be more layoff? Is layoff becoming the norm or we not going to have more that as much layoff and people can have a longer position in their a longer time in their current position? Well, I think some of the uh tech layoffs that you're talking about, which you're right, uh have happened over the last couple years in part because the tech companies hired so much uh leading up to that. And I think many tech companies said, "Okay, we kind of overdid it. We were scrambling for workers. We overdid it. We now need to streamline." And that's that's different than what I'm a little bit worried about right now, which I'm a little bit worried about right now is there's enough overhanging uncertainty in the economy that maybe businesses are going to start laying people off. We haven't seen it yet that there's some big uh tariff uncertainty induced layoffs yet in the economy, but that's something that I'm nervous about watching carefully for. We're not we're not seeing an uptick, for example, in unemployment claims yet. We're not seeing announcements of big layoffs yet, though some businesses report to us that they're scenario planning for potential layoffs depending how long this uncertainty lasts. Um, so I think what you've described so far is more of the normal ups and downs of a given sector. I'm long-term bullish on technology in America. I'm long-term bullish on STEM uh as as fields. Um but you know, I'm not dismissive of the fact that individuals in a moment can face challenges. You know, when I graduated from Wharton in O2 2002, I decided to go into the tech uh financial area, tech banking area, and that area was in a deep depression after the tech bubble had burst. And so, um, I know there can be real challenges and I but I just think relative to other places being in STEM in America right now, uh, I'm bullish about your career prospects. Thank you very much. Uh, so you look, you work for the local regional Fed and I was curious how you see the challenges of our local regional economy versus the economy of the country. um the university often has a large local focus as well as national focus and so I was just hoping you could comment on that. It's you it's funny our region that we represent the Minneapolis Fed it's looks a lot like the country as a whole because we have a lot of a we have manufacturing we have a lot of services we have healthcare we have some technology we have some commodities so what happens here kind of happens nationally what happens nationally kind of happens here the areas here that are feeling most pressure are a related they were already you know a has cycles it's a commodity market it has cycles it was already in a relatively low point in terms commod crop prices and now there's great nervousness about the tariffs and reciprocal tariffs uh especially coming from China. We export a lot of soybeans. Where are those soybeans going to go if China's going to be buying from Brazil instead of buying for us? Um and then of course you know manufacturing. I've heard some optimism that maybe if there's some more demand for domestically produced goods that'll be good for local manufacturers but it's highly uncertain right now. So I think overall we look kind of like the country as a whole. We have a somewhat lower unemployment rate here in Minnesota than the country as a whole, but I think we're relatively similarly positioned. And we have time for one more question from the audience. Thank you so much. You've made the point several times that to a certain degree uh consumer sentiment is a self-fulfilling prophecy. We start to worry, we all get worried, we're all worried, and then there's a problem. Or the same way the other way around. So I'm hesitant to ask this question. But what keeps you awake at night? We can all lose sleep over it. Then [Laughter] coming things are things are changing uh every day in the so the Fed handles monetary policy. We move interest rates around to try to manage the ups and downs of the US economy in the next year or two. But these bigger issues that we've been talking about, whether it's trade policy or tax policy or fiscal policy or education policy, these are the things that actually set America's competitiveness over the long run. And right now, the frequency of uh announcements that are coming out of Washington, um, you know, it's it's hard to it's hard to keep up with and to process what they mean because by the time you've analyzed it, we're in a new situation a couple days later. And so I think that's that's created a challenge for policy makers. I think it's created a challenge for everybody. Well, I want to thank uh you all, but before there's there's a get off the stage question just because Bonnie brought up something here in the university, we face a great deal of uncertainty as well too as we were just talking about before. Um uh and many of the directives that come out of the the the federal um government impact us. And you know, as a as an academic leer, it's it's easy to sort of get pretty high and well, actually, not pretty, get pretty low and then come back to the mean and get pretty low. Um, uh, the the then does the mean move? The thing that like I it it it struck me um it was about a a month ago. I I had a a a meeting with our uh it was part of a strategic planning activity that we're doing um with our SCSB. It's the the student um board student board society board um um and talking to you know there's probably maybe about 60 70 of our undergraduate students across all the different fields um about like what they would like the university to be um uh you know how they think it could to to impact the world that they live in and when I left that I mean I'd had a pretty tough day until then because that's when we I had a couple of announcement come I left that meeting That evening I was smiling. I I was actually feeling really good. I was like, "Yeah, the kids are all right." You know, um um we we tough as it we got this. So So you know, interacting with some of the younger people is what gives me hope. As challenges things are uncertain as things are, are there certain like things in your world that you see sort of day-to-day that sort of like, "Yeah, we got this. We've seen tougher. We got this." Yeah. So I mean it's something that you said um I can't remember who said it to you but it completely resonated with me. I read I said I read a lot of history. This moment is not that remarkable. I mean some of the numbers are remarkable this etc. But if you read read our nation's history the period that you and I grew up in of relative political harmony is the anomaly. It is not the norm. the norm is there's a lot of political strife in America and we've gotten through that before and so I'm absolutely confident that we will get through this again uh and better and brighter days as as much and many challenges as we have I would not trade places with any other country in the world by miles our problems that we have here amen you know we can address them it's within our capacity to address them uh some other challenges are are not in a country's capacity to address. Well, on that very positive, bright, hopeful note, um uh yeah, things things things will will get better. Um let me thank uh Neil and and let me ask you all to to thank Neil as well too for a wonderful hour. Thank you so much. This is great.