https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2025/neel-kashkari-qa-at-the-us-chamber-of-commerce-global-summit

Neel Kashkari Q&A at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Global Summit

April 22, 2025

US

Neel Kashkari

Please welcome editor at large for the national interest, Steve Clemens, and the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neil Keshkari. Hi everybody. Thank you for joining us today. Um Neil, you and I I have about 10 years on you and you and I have been to countless economic conferences. I mean it's your job actually to host economic conferences be at economic conferences and most of them don't I think have the import of certain inflection points in history and I think if you think back to the 089 financial crisis that was one covid was one maybe the uh uh you know various um accords we've had in the past this seems like an inflection point because the anxiety in America and around the world about how the economy is supposed to work and what the levers is up for um debate. And I just want to open with the news that right now there's a lot of anxiety over the key players making economic policy. One of those is the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, Jay Powell. Uh President Trump um has been issuing very very strong pressure on the Fed. And Jay Powell, what are your thoughts? Well, uh first of all, thanks for having me. I really appreciate it. Uh it's now conventional wisdom in advanced economies all around the world that keeping monetary policy independent of short-term political considerations leads to better outcomes for that economy, leads to lower inflation over time, leads to stronger economic growth, leads to better levels, higher levels of employment. And so I think that that is foundational. We've, you know, if you look in the 1970s, we did not have that. the Federal Reserve screwed up, allowed itself to make decisions for political reasons, and then we had very high inflation and um stagflation of the 1970s as a result of that. And so I think independent monetary policy has been foundational for our economic success over the past 40 years uh and strongly believe in that. So are you saying I'm going to, you know, just be friendly with this, but are you saying this because you too are a you know, president of a central bank, you know, when you think because you worked for a presidency, you worked for George W. Bush, you I mean I want to tell the audience, you used to have the job of financial stability at the Treasury Department. You were assistant secretary and right now one wonders what financial stability looks like again and kind of in that world. But if you're in the executive branch and you want to achieve something and you look at these uh um assets on the board, you can do it. Put yourself in the shoes of someone in the White House. Is it inappropriate of them to pressure the Fed the way they're doing? I mean, even though I know you've got a hat as a central, you know, bank chief, politicians all the time offer their opinions about what they think monetary policy should be. Our jobs at the Fed are to make the best decisions we can. We're not perfect, but make the best decisions we can based on data and rigorous analysis. And I'm going to give you an example of what independence looks like from my perspective. I joined the Federal Reserve in 2016. President Obama was still president. And during 2016 and the President Trump's first term, I was arguably the most or one of the most dovish members of the committee because inflation was low and I saw there was still slack in the labor market when then we had the big inflation spike. Uh I became one of the more hawkish members of the committee. That happened to be when President Biden was president and now I'm probably someplace in the middle. So my metamorphosis from dove to hawk to moderate is that because of politics? No. That's because of the economic environment changing the data changing and my read of what's necessary to go back and achieve our goals. All that the analysis has driven my uh my evolution. And if you look around the committee, I can say that's true for all of my colleagues. Even the ones that we may be on different sides of a of a given vote at a given day, I know they're making the best call that they can based on data and analysis. That's what independent central banking means. Uh and that's what I think uh is is very special about the Federal Reserve. You know, Suzanne Clark, the president and CEO of the US Chamber, was up here um talking about a principal difference with the White House over tariffs. And I'm interested in how tariffs are perceived by those of you looking at inflation and inflation rates. You know, tariffs are a policy choice, which is a different kind of thing to respond to than economic wobbliness over consumer behavior in the kind of business cycle. Tariffs you you do to them and you do it to yourself. How does that fit into the equation? Well, we take as inputs. We have very complicated models to try to forecast the US economy. There are a lot of inputs into those models. For example, trade policy is an input into those models. Uh uh fiscal policy, tax policy, what the government chooses to invest in and spend on, those are completely outside of our control. They're outside of our responsibility. We don't offer judgments about them, but those are inputs as we analyze what is the potential for the US economy and what is likely to happen to inflation. So tariffs we know push up prices so they're at least somewhat inflationary, at least a one-time boost in the price level and they slow down economic growth. Now why that's challenging for the Fed is that we have one tool we call monetary policy that can either push up growth and push up inflation or push down growth and push down inflation. And so the problem is our one tool is being its intention right now because the nature of uh this policy change that's hitting the US economy. So a lot of a lot of folks including yourself I mean I'd love you to to share your thoughts on tariffs and whether you believe they can trigger inflation and if those tariffs do in fact trigger inflation. Inflation is part of an expectation. It's not just a you know you know an explicit overt change in the prices of something. It's what people think over time is going to happen. Right? Right. So it's the anticipation of the rise in prices contributes to inflation. Is that tariff justify what President Trump is asking for which is a reduction in rates? Well, um it's too soon to judge what's going to happen to the path of interest rates. But I will say this, you know, there's a there's a very logical argument to be made that a tariff is a one-time increase in prices. So if you put a 10% tariff, the Treasury Secretary has said that. Yeah. onetime increase in prices and then inflation should be low going forward. The challenge is we've had four years of high inflation. And so the challenge is with that backdrop, are we running the risk and would the Fed run the risk of allowing inflation expectations to get unanchored? Just as you said in the setup to your question, if we all believe high inflation is now the new normal, it becomes more likely to in fact be the new normal. And so we cannot allow inflation expectations to get unanchored. There's a lot of data that suggests that near-term inflation expectations have increased quite a bit in response to this the trade wars. So far, the evidence is not there that long run inflation expectations have moved very much. It's our job to make sure that that does not happen. And so, you know, we just don't know right now with confidence. Is this a one-time effect on inflation or is it something longer term? Our job with the Fed is to make sure it is not something longer term. You know, Neil, I'm fascinated by Minneapolis and, you know, I don't know how the Fed works, whether you have, you know, whether you uh uh a sign on loyalty to the whole US country or to you're, you know, concerned about the Minneapolis region. The Minneapolis region has some of the, you know, I think it may be number one in the country for headquartered firms, huge manufacturing backbone, but it's also a place where there's lots of AI and kind of service sector um uh uh presence, a robust service sector presence. And I'm just interested in how you look at and talk about the equation of a healthy economy because we're being told right now that manufacturing widgets and and the fact that we stop doing as much of that matters more than a lot of other things and we have you know the ideas we have services we have quantum research AI research which are all much more ethereal but the manufacturing of things bringing that back is is something that is very much on the president's mind and looking explicitly at bilateral trade imbalances. And I I know you're smart. You've been around this and you're you know hung out with a lot of Republicans. I'm just sort of interested into how you see that equation. Is the president's equation fixing something that was broken in our understanding of economics or is he breaking something that's important to keep in our economic health? Nice. Um uh I'll I'll answer it this way. Uh why do we have a trade deficit? This is economic math. Any country that is the premier destination for investment around the world? If investors around the world say that this c this country is the best place to invest, by definition, the economic math is by definition that country will have a trade deficit. And so, you know, you can reach your own conclusions if that's a good thing or bad thing. The way that shows up in the US economy is if investors around the world want to invest in America, our interest rates on the average will be a little bit lower than otherwise. To no longer have a trade deficit, investors would have to conclude, hey, America is no longer the best place in the world to invest that there are other places we want to invest. And then you could reduce or eliminate the trade deficit. And that would then show up in higher borrowing costs across higher borrowing costs across the economy because less investment capital is flowing into. So isn't that happening? Well, there's some bonds. There's some evidence, you know, it's still early. Um, but it shook it. Did it shake you? Well, usually when there's any kind of shock to the US economy or the global economy, people run to US bonds, US government bonds as a source of safety. What we saw in recent month, the recent month or so is bond yields going up in America, not so much in other advanced economies. In some cases, bond yields went down and the dollar went down, which that indicates to me, at least initially, some type of reassessment of where do we want to invest? It's not that people are fleeing America, but is it true? Is it as true today, that we are the destination of choice as perhaps we were a month ago? Now, the thing I'll say is all of this can change quickly if there are resolutions to these trade skirmishes in the near future. Then maybe we go back to one of global trade flows and a lot of capital coming into America. We're just in a moment of extreme uncertainty right now because nobody knows. We don't know what the Fed the audience doesn't know. We just don't know. You know, I'm really interested in, you know, something that's sort of, you know, psychoscychological sentiment. You know, when you kind of look at it, you there's a lot of talk in your world about seminar. I've heard him I've been privileged to hear him a number of times. He talks a lot about sentiment. Sentiment seems to be on a wild roller coaster ride and very rapidly. I think how's the market today? It's pretty high, right? Like I'm going up anybody up down anybody? You guys have to be watching. I think it's up. yesterday down big but I mean I know my mood is being affected by it but I mean when you kind of look at the aggregate sentiment in the country does it surprise you that it's shifting is so so dramatically and what does that cause for policy makers like yourself that are trying to navigate that terrain? Yeah, this so this is you know sentiment was very high in December and the early part of January. Uh we inflation was coming down like solidly high or like up in like high December early December early January it was solidly high inflation was coming down. The economy was growing briskly. We'd had very good growth the last couple years in the economy exceeding our expectations. I've commented this publicly. the last 6 weeks or last two months has been the sharpest reduction in confidence in the 10 years that I've been at the Fed except for March of 2020 when COVID hit. I mean there we talked to a lot of businesses big and small all across our region and it was remarkable how quickly they got concerned. So there's there's two issues with the trade wars and the tariffs. One is the math of tariffs. So for each of your businesses, you know, you're doing math on I need to buy these goods from abroad. They're now going to cost more. I'm exporting abroad. My my goods are now going to cost my customers more. There's math associated with that which is pretty straightforward. The other piece of this is confidence where you started with which is if everybody gets nervous at the same time and we all pull back at the same time and we don't take our families on vacation. We don't make that investment that itself can precipitate an economic slowdown or in an extreme even a recession. Now, which of those is bigger? The math of tariffs? The math of tariffs right now is quite large. I mean one the highest in a 100 years. But the hit to confidence is also quite large. And so this is why I go back to how long is this uncertain environment going to be maintained. I don't know. If there are quick resolutions on uh with our major trading partners, then maybe the uncertainty can be lifted quickly. But we're just going to have to wait and see. You know, you mentioned major trading partners and I think one of the big questions out there, you know, the the explicit reasons for some of the tariffs beyond well, it was fentinel and then it shifted to some other things, but really was to to rebalance the structural dependencies that the United States has particularly in national security related sectors. But I think more, you know, uh uh beyond that, but trade requires willing parties. And when you look at that, you look at Canada, you look Mexico. If you're going to compete with China, if you're going to do friend shoring in addition to onshoring, you need friends. How do you think America is doing in the friend side of the whatever onshoring may look like the competition with China? You know, it's not it's not for me to appine. This is really outside the scope of the Federal Reserve. Uh we do pay attention to what's happening into economies all around the world because they matter to us. They are our big trading partners. If other advanced economies have a slowdown, we're not going to be unaffected by that. That will affect us. Uh and certainly conversations that I have with global businesses, as you said, we have a lot of Fortune 500 companies headquartered in my region. They do business all around the world. Uh there's a level of anxiety again I haven't seen since CO hit. Well, let me ask you about this in a different way, which is when you look at global capital flows and the choices that are made, does, how do I put it? Do we need to be careful in the US of not creating an unhospitable environment for those capital flows? It was fascinating to me and you may want to comment about this about Mario Draghy's report about Europe and European competitiveness where he underscores the the lack of competitiveness and the illiberal dimensions of a lot of European uh capital markets as being a real ball and chain around growth and investment inside Europe. But I'm just interested in whether or not that gap between a healthy, robust capital markets world in the US is is potentially at risk. Well, people have talked about American exceptionalism. And what does that mean? Where does that come from? It comes from our rule of law. It comes from our entrepreneurial uh sectors. It comes from our university systems, our education systems. It comes from a lot of different things. And that then expresses itself in something we talked about a few minutes ago, which is people want to come here and investment wants to flow here. Investors around the world want to invest here. If they're going to reach different conclusions, then that's going to show up here, right? For the Fed, why does this matter to the Fed? We think a lot about the path of interest rates and what interest rates are going to achieve stable inflation, 2% inflation, and maximum employment. These are the goals that we've been assigned by Congress. Well, that interest rate level is is largely influenced by these capital flows. It's not just savings from America. If savings from investors around the world want to come to America, our interest rates will be lower. If they want to go elsewhere, our interest rates will be higher. And if interest rates are higher across the economy, then all of your businesses and all of us as consumers are going to ultimately have to bear those costs. Neil, do you have all the tools you need or the framing you need to govern the economy? One of the interesting um changes, we're doing a some discussions later this week on the changing terrain of global finance and kind of one of the new mountain ranges that's growing up in the world is around digital currencies and crypto and I listen to a lot of central bankers and that's not our thing. We're not, you know, we we talk about dollars or central bank assets, not these other things. But is this being forced on you in a way? you know, you're talking about a strategic reserve in Bitcoin or, you know, do you do you have to change your aperture a little bit in terms of begin thinking about other assets and other potential currencies, if you will? You know, we watch all of this. We study it. We want to understand what's happening around the world. Um, I've this is very public. I've been very skeptical of cryptocurrencies having any relevance in the US because I always ask people, name me what problem this is solving. You know, I could send anybody in this room $5 right now with Venmo or PayPal, right? The private sector has already innovated these very efficient ways of transacting with one another. So, what problem is a Bitcoin or something like that solving and usually I just get a I get a bunch of word salad answers. There's no actual there. When you try to pull the thread, there's not much behind it. So, you know, we'll keep our eyes open and we'll see. Um, it isn't obvious to me what the use case is in the United States other than circumventing bank regulations. And this is something that if we don't need banking regulations, then we should revisit the banking regulations. But to just say, well, there's going to be some new technology that's going to get around regulation, that doesn't seem like a very good policy outcome. you know, another dimension of your um your dashboard, if you will, is looking at labor rates, looking at unemployment rates and looking at the content of labor and also uh you know, what's affecting that and I think it's a long long story for many decades of looking at the impact of automation, of technology, to some degree of trade on the labor force. We have very low unemployment now. So we have low unemployment, we have risks of inflation, we have tariffs coming up, and we also have robotics and automation kind of kind of barely in. What do you think is the biggest factors that we need to get around? And what are blind spots when it comes to thinking about that equation? Because, you know, labor and employment matter a lot to you. Yeah, one of our goals is maximum employment. As many Americans as possible gainfully employed and contributing to our economy. I am very bullish on labor. You know, for the for the last 200 years, people have been predicting the end of labor, that robots and automation are going to be put workers out. There's going to be no role for workers. The nature of jobs has changed a lot, moving from farms into factories. That those changes can be disruptive for the folks that are experienced them in the moment. But labor has done very very well as a result of technology development over time. And so to me, it keeps going back to focusing on equipping our our workers with tools, education, education at their youngest ages, higher education, and then giving them access to the tools, the physical tools that they need uh to be able to do that work. So, I'm very bullish about innovation. I'm bullish about uh the ability of technology to enhance people's lives and productivity. And I'm bullish that uh workers are still going to have to big contributions. Are we training well enough from your perspective? You know when you talk about that I know it's not your job but it raises the question of whether you think about upskilling and the kind of skills that an economy needs you know how do we stack up against other nations in the world and are we doing a good enough de job domestically in that function yeah I mean I think uh our higher education system has been the envy of the world we've been able to attract not only developing brilliant talent at those universities but attracting brilliant talent from around the world which has been a huge driver of economic growth and competitiveness here in America. Um, and I think we can always do better. A lot of businesses that I talked to in our region, they're saying, "Where are our workers going to come from?" You know, we haven't talked about immigration. One of the reasons that the US economy grew as strongly as it did the last few years was because there was a huge increase in immigration, surprising levels of increase in immigration. Those ended up being people who were workers producing things and consumers buying things and consuming things. So the GDP growth was higher than we had expected. And so I think the trade dynamics and where this all settles is going to be very important. The immigration dynamics ultimately is going to be very important to us longrun economic growth and competitiveness. So what does the future look tight when you look at your models and you know there's a lot of discussion about soft landings and a lot of fear of stagflation or now there's a renewed discussion of recessions. What goes into that? And and as your team looks at this and as you get into the committee discussions, what are the big factors that you're watching that are going to determine how uh we navigate that well or not? Yeah. Well, one of the factors I mean I just want to say I thought largely and this is my subjective view inflation or not inflation but recession had largely been taken off the table for a long time. It's back in a big big raging way. So this is a discussion. Yeah. This is the challenge with uncertainty. If you look at our economic models, the uncertainty component can have a small effect or it can have a huge effect. And we don't have confidence in knowing how big an effect it's going to have until we actually see the data. Most of the data that we're looking at right now is still old. It's still trailing data. So, we're looking I I have not heard, for example, in the labor market. I have not seen evidence of widespread layoffs yet. I'm happy about that. But how long can this uncertainty be maintained before businesses actually start to pull back and feel like no, we've got to start shedding workers? So, I'm going to be paying very close attention to new unemployment claims to layoff announcements to see is the labor market softening materially. The labor market has softened relative to a year ago, relative to two years ago, but with a 4.2% unemployment rate, it's still overall a healthy labor market. But again, that data is now stale. And so what's going to be the case next week, next month, three or six months from now if we don't get some of this uncertainty lifted. One of the other areas, Neil, that there's a lot of anxiety about is in the entitlements world, Medicare, Social Security, uh the actions of Doge and the the fear that maybe the system is not going to work as well or it's going to get wobbly or they're going to be big mishaps and you can go out and you can pull the anxiety is pretty dramatic. do those um features figure into the economic modeling you're doing and do they represent you know there's tariffs out there but there's also what's happening to the government workforce and the way the system and machinery works is that a area of concern yeah I would say that I mean it goes back to confidence I mean I don't think the government workers themselves they matter these are important people they have families um and the scale of the US economy I don't think it's that big a dent in terms of the number of workers it matters a lot for this region I mean for the Washington DC region, it matters a lot. But even if you look at, let's say, when a hurricane, a devastating hurricane hits Florida or hits the Gulf Coast, the US economy is so huge, that hurricane will barely show up in the national statistics. So I don't think that the layoffs of federal workers are going to have a big imprint in the national statistics, but I do think it's causing the fear that you talked about, and I do think it's adding to that uncertainty. That uncertainty is likely going to show up in the national statistics at some point. You know, every time I turn around, there's another couple of trillion on top of the national debt. Does debt matter? I mean, one a buddy of mine, Richard Vague, wrote a book called The Paradox of Debt. And he found that as debt has increased, there seems to be a correlation between rise in household wealth in America. It's actually staggering. And the and the creation of household wealth has been, you know, significantly larger uh than the increasing in debt levels. But when you look at where the you know the growth and gains of that that wealth has gone, it's gone to the very top sector. You have shown that you really care about inclusive growth and you care about balanced growth. You built a center that studies this um at the Minneapolis uh Federal Reserve. You know, I I'm interested in your views on does debt matter and by being so focused on curtailing it, are you also going to roll back household wealth? Well, um so think about debt to GDP. US debt to GDP around 100% of GDP. um it's now at levels that for some countries have gotten into a lot of trouble when they've accumulated this much debt. At the same time, Japan has twice as much debt to GDP and they are funding themselves fine. So people have asked me, well, what's the level where there are concerns and the answer is you you don't know it in advance and it's not entirely up to us. It goes back to hey 100% of debt to GDP is fine because investors around the world say this is where we want to invest and we've got confidence in the US. We have confidence in the rule of law. We have confidence in our financial markets and our competitiveness. If that confidence is undermined maybe we can't go as high as Japan. And where is that level? Again it's not entirely up to us. It's not entirely scientific. It's in part affected by our relative position, our relative strength, and where we if we're no longer the economy that investors around the world say, "Hey, this is the preeminent competitive economy," then we probably have less runway than if we were solidly the preeminent competitive economy. And I hope that we are and maintain being the pre-minent competitive economy. Do you think there's a day you will wake up, I will wake up where all of a sudden the US dollar is not the reserve currency of the world? Well, it's exactly the same conversation we just had. What determines the reserve currency? Which which major economy do investors around the world have the most confidence in that over history is what has determined and the reserve currency has changed over time. And so um I want and I hope that America maintains its preeminent position in the global economy uh and therefore the dollar would maintain its role of preeminence as well. I don't know if this is an appropriate question but I just want to ask you how's Jay Powell doing as as uh I I think I think he's doing I think he's doing great. You know he's been he's done a terrific job as chair. I worked with him when he was a governor, when Jenny Yellen was our You all have to like each other in the committee or there's some people who don't like each other. I think we like each other and I think uh we respect each other. Jay has done an outstanding job keeping all of us laser focused on the job that Congress has assigned us. What we call our dual mandate. Focus on data, focus on analysis. That's our job. We're going to stick to it. You know, another question I've always wondered is because you're in Minneapolis and I told you I'm very very impressed with the research staff there. or I read reports from uh the regional feds and the ones from Minneapolis are just extraordinarily insightful and I'm not trying to be nice. They just really stand out uh as great documents. But it raises the question about the evenness of reserves in the country and whether it matters. you know, how I are you are you out there actually playing a function, you know, in your local region that is not often reported or talked about that's different than coming and having, you know, FOMC meetings and, you know, having uh, you know, sort of the, you know, the big the big discussions about rate, where rate should go. I'm really interested in the diversity of of of the banks, uh, of the reserve banks and and what that means. Yeah. Well, it goes back to our history. So we were created by Congress in 1913 and Congress wanted the different regions of the country to have a direct voice in the policy process. So they created the board of governors in Washington and they create who are appointed by the president of United States, confirmed by the Senate and they created 12 independent Federal Reserve banks where I'm appointed by a local board of leaders in our region. My job is to make policy recommendations for the country as a whole. So, I'm not advocating for Minnesota because you can't have one interest rate from Minnesota and a different for New York and a different for Washington DC. But, uh, part of my judgments are informed by conversations that I have with businesses and workers and labor groups in my region. You know, the economy is always sending us mixed signals. So, how do we make sense? Is are things going up or things going down? Conversations with businesses of all sizes help us to make sense out of that some of those noisy signals. And so I think the regional feds play a really important role. They complement the work that is done in Washington DC and they bring a different perspective. So Neil, before you got into all this heavy economics, um I was fascinated that you worked for TRW and you were hanging out in Roondo Beach. I don't know if you went surfing or to the beach regularly, but something the audience may not know is you worked on the, you know, James Webb telescope. You apparently were given credit for figuring, you know, some stabilizing piece of this. I mean, you were a promising young engineer in one of the hottest uh national security places. So, I guess my question to you is why did you leave all that? Well, first of all, you're giving me way too much credit. Uh I was a very junior engineer, but it was true. I it was for the James Webb Space Telescope. I was like a mosquito on this very big complicated project. Uh but it it was a very cool experience. My managers were encouraging me to get my PhD in aerospace engineering. And I knew if I had done that that I'd be committing my whole career to that. and I wasn't ready to make such a commitment. So I decided to go back to business school and then I found my way into banking and finance and then had an interest in government and so it's a a long meandering path that led me here. So very finally you worked with Hank Pollson, you helped him with his biography. You were in the middle of uh all that wonderful drama in 2008 2009. You worked for President Bush and Obama and others. But in that in that space and you saw that tension, how does this moment compare to that moment? Uh when you when you I'm just sort of interested in these moments of crisis, high anxiety. How does today compared to then? Today um in some ways is easier because it's up to us. You know, it's policy choices have led to uncertainty and policy choices can relieve the uncertainty. In the '08 crisis, we weren't sure how to get our arms around this housing crisis. How do we what tools do we need to even try to arrest it? When COVID hit, how how dangerous is this virus? Can you come up with a vaccine? Are there treatments? Massive uncertainty outside of our control. What makes me optimistic is I think people in the US government and other governments want to reach some forms of agreement and if agreements are reached then hopefully the uncertainty can be lifted quickly uh and then your members can get back to what they do best. Well, ladies and gentlemen, I can't tell you of a better person to start this uh global summit than Neil Kashkari, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Thank you so much for joining us. Let's give him a big Thank you very much. I appreciate it. Thank you, Neil. Thank you.