https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2024/Neel-Kashkari-QA-at-Yahoo-Finance-Invest-2024-conference

Neel Kashkari Q&A at Yahoo Finance Invest 2024 conference

November 12, 2024

New York, New York

Neel Kashkari

the economy keeps them rising to the upside. we got third quarter GDP of 2.8%, driven by strong consumer spending, up 3.7%. we've seen household incomes savings revised upwards. can the strength continue into next year? I think so. I mean that's you in your question. you said it correctly. we continue to be surprised by the resilience of the US economy. three or four years ago, if you'd said to me we're going to raise interest rates by 500 plus basis points, I would have thought that would slam the break on the US economy. it hasn't. the economy's been remarkably resilient, which is a really good thing. so in the last few couple years we brought inflation down, not all the way to 2%. we're running at about a 2 and a half% rate and the labor market has remained strong. right now it looks like that's going to continue. I do a lot of Outreach to businesses, large and small, across my part of the country, to labor groups. they all share cautious optimism and so right now the fundamentals seem strong and I'm optimistic that's going to continue. how do president elect Donald Trump's proposed policies- from across the board tariffs to mass deportations, tax cuts and deregulation- influence your outlook for the economy, understanding that we don't quite know the exact timing and extent of the implementation of these policies. well, there's so much uncertainty about what any new Administration is going to do, ultimately, what they're going to do in negotiating with Congress. we at the FED simply have to wait and see. whatever the Congress and the executive branch decide to do, we will then model it into our analysis of the economy, analysis of the economy's potential and outlook for the labor market and inflation. but until those policies are decided upon, until they become clear, we can't do anything, and so we're just going to wait and see. on the proposed tariffs, we know that the president elect has said that he's looking to impose 10% tariffs on all us Imports, 60% tariffs on all Chinese Imports. if that scenario were to go into effect, what impact would you expect on inflation and Supply chains? well, on inflation, just step back from those specific proposals and just think about how tariffs work. a tariff, generally speaking, from an inflation perspective, we think of as a onetime increase in prices. so if you have a 1% tariff, you could think of it as a 1% increase in prices of those goods that are subjected to the Tariff. that by itself is not inflationary over the long run. it's a one-time change in the price level. where it becomes complicated is if, how the other country responds. so if there's a Tit for Tat, and what? an increase in tariffs from the us, a response from other countries, and it goes back and forth, then you could imagine a longer term inflationary impact. and so right now, as I said a moment ago, it's uncertain what the proposal will be, what will get implemented, and then, importantly, how other countries will respond. right now we're all just guessing and so I can't oine one way or the other. sure, when it comes to immigration, we that has been a big part of the resiliency of the job market the past couple of years. it certainly helped with the labor shortages that we've been seeing. uh, the president-elect has proposed Mass deportations again. we don't know the extent of this policy, but taken on its face, generally speaking, what impact would you expect on the job market and wages? well, if you just start by assuming that the vast majority of immigrants who are here are gainfully employed, then at the extreme those businesses would lose those workers and that would provide some form of disruption to those businesses. I ultimately think what'll end up getting implemented will be a negotiation between Congress, the executive branch and business. uh will figure out a way to do whatever that they've decided to do, uh, and then we will have to respond, and so I'm not here to Aline positive or negative, but ultimately it could have a big effect, uh, but we need to wait and see on what ends up actually happening. let me ask you about your outlook for inflation. you said earlier this fall that you weren't too worried about upside risks to inflation. you cited uh wages and core non-housing Services prices that continue to fall. but core pce, your favorite inflation gauge, has been stuck at 2.7% for 3 months. so how confident are you that inflation is still falling to your 2% Target? well, we break inflation down by its subcomponent, so Goods inflation is running uh roughly back where it was pre pandemic, to slightly disinflationary levels. uh. if you look at uh other parts of services inflation, they're tied to wages. wage growth is slowly cooling. housing inflation is the big elephant that is still out there. and if you look at where new leases are, new lease inflation has already fallen back down to very low levels, but new leases take a couple years to work their way through into the broader measures of housing inflation. so you know I I don't want to declare Victory too early, but I think there's pretty good reason that we have confidence that the housing piece of this will slowly return back down to more normal levels. ultimately we're going to get back down to 2% inflation. it may take a year or two to get all the way there, given some of these housing Dynamics, but the trends so far are encouraging. what about the job market? we've seen a lot of volatility in those monthly jobs reports. the October report slammed by those two hurricanes, the Boeing worker strike. how are you looking at the labor market now? well, the labor market, as I we mentioned a few minutes ago, has been surprisingly resilient: a 4.1% unemployment rate. it's a good labor market. when I meet with, again, not just businesses but also labor groups around my region, it's one of cautious optimism. I mean a bunch of labor unions that I've met with recently have said that they're feeling confident enough that they're going to have some actions taking place, meaning they're preparing to strike. they're feeling like they're in a strong position. usually I don't hear labor unions talking about that. if they're feeling like the, the pendulum is swung away from labor. so most of the dimensions that we look at, the labor market is still strong. it is not as redh hot as it was a year or two ago, but the fundamentals are still sound, and so that's that's encouraging to me that the labor market looks robust and consumer spending continues to surprises. consumers continue to be resilient. the fact that the savings rate has been revised up is is also encouraging, suggesting that consumers, on average, are not getting overextended. uh, so right now the economy looks like it's in a strong position. so then what does that mean for the rate cutting path forward? you said earlier this week that another rate cut in December is certainly possible. what would make a rate cut not possible in December? well, I think if, um, if we saw inflation surprises to the upside between now and then- you know that might give us pause- um, if the labor market, it'd be. so it'd be hard to imagine the labor market really heats up between now and December. there's just not that much time. I think there'd have to be a surprise on the inflation front, uh, for to change the Outlook so dramatically. the bigger question long run is: where are we going to settle? what does neutral represent? one big surprise over the past couple years, if, if the economy has been more resilient than I expected in the face of this High policy rate? how do you answer that question? why has that been the case? the answer that I'm taking away is: maybe the neutral environment. the neutral rate environment has gone up, at least in the short run. now how long is that higher neutral rate environment going to persist? I don't know. uh, a helpful data point over the last couple years is: productivity looks like it's been stronger. if productivity is going to continue to be strong, all else being equal, that would relate to me to be a higher neutral environment. think about what sets the neutral environment. it's the balance between savings and investment, and if the productivity environment of the US economy is higher, all else being equal, there should be more demand for investment Capital to fund those productive Investments. so in a higher productivity environment, the neutral rate ought to be higher, and so if we are in a structurally higher productivity environment, that would tell me we have less room to cut until we eventually get back to neutral. I'm not saying we're. we're very close to neutral right now, but when we think about the destination, we may not go down as far. so, given what you just said, we know the consensus of the fomc is for four more rate Cuts next year, given the strength of the economy that you expect it can continue. given your comments just now on neutral, do you see fewer than four rate Cuts next year? we have to see what the data says. I mean ultimately the data you know. one thing that chairman Powell says is the. you know the neutral. the neutral rate is not directly observable. we know it by its effect on the economy, and so we're going to continue to monitor the labor market, inflation, GDP spending to try to F it out. how close are we coming to neutral? I think we all agree we are above neutral now, but over the course of the next year we're going to get a lot more information about where neutral is, and we're also going to be looking at Market signals in terms of the real yield curve. where is the long end of the real yield curve? that's giving us some feedback as well. let's get to the yield curve in a minute, but I'm curious whether Donald Trump's election changes the terminal rate forecast for you. you know we have to wait and see. we have to wait and see what ultimately gets enacted by the Congress and by the executive branch before we determine any anything. obviously, the long end of the the yield curve has moved a lot in the last since we started cutting rates, you know 6, eight weeks ago. the long end of the curve has moved a lot. it doesn't look like that is in long-term inflation expectations. there's been some move in short run inflation expectations, but long run inflation expectations do appear to be well anchored. um, could that be a view of that? productivity is higher and the neutral rate is higher. that's probably part of it. some people have speculated that maybe there's expectations about more deficits to come. you know, we'll have to see. there are a bunch of different components in there that we need to try to strip out to understand what markets are telling us, and the thing that gets complicated for us is that we look at markets, but a lot of times markets are looking at us, so it's a little bit like we're looking in the mirror. so trying to Fig it out, what is a real signal and what is just a reflective signal? uh, it's an inexact science. how restrictive do you think you are right now? uh, I would say, in my judgment, I think we're modestly restrictive. uh, just by the virtue of the fact that we went up to 5 and a qu% and the job market remained as resilient. that tells me we could not have been very, very restrictive. so, instead of, while I thought we were putting two feet on the brakes, I think in hindsight we were probably only putting one foot on the brakes. and what's really difficult about this is this notion of a neutral rate. it appears to be time varying. so, yes, the neutral rate has been elevated in recent months or the last couple years. how long is it going to stay there? you know, we're not sure. you mentioned the yield curve, the yield on the 10year treasury, up better than 70 basis points since you first started cutting, and you've actually cut by 75 basis points. so how does that complicate your job of this persists, and where do you see the yield on the 10e going? well, it complicates it. you know, trying to assess. uh, this conversation we're having is a lot about trying to assess how restrictive is The Stance of monetary policy, and I always think that there's four components to four instruments that we have in monetary policy. there's the federal funds rate. there's the path, the expected path of the federal funds rate. there's the balance sheet and the expected path of the balance sheet. all four of those are individual tools that go together, that represent the Stant of monetary policy and I look at the long end of the real yeld curve, so say 10year tips as a proxy that puts all of those components together. 10year tips today is something around 2%. prior to the pandemic it was roughly around zero, which at that time I thought was roughly a UT stance. in the middle of the pandemic, with all the stimulus, we drove it down to minus one. it then went up to about plus 2 and a half and it's now running at around a 2% level. so right now, at a 2% real tips rate at the 10year, uh, the economy is still performing pretty well and so you know we're going to need to watch and see again it goes back to: are we in a higher productivity environment? are we in a higher structural growth environment? can the economy grow with this, this type of real yields? you know we're going to have to see and it's going to ultimately be a judgment call as we take in the new data and adjust our policies and response. the trajectory of debt is not a good one. we're close to 100% of debt to GDP and it's rising. it's expected to continue Rising under the new Administration and would have under Harris if she were elected as well. curious does the trajectory of put the discipline of fiscal policy to R it in, or does the Central Bank feel pressure to try to offset that trajectory? as far as long-term rates, well, first, if you look at the Congressional budget office's forecast of the debt over the next 20 years, it goes to the Moon, it grows unsustainably, uh, and that obviously cannot happen. so, ultimately, Congress and the executive branch will need to work together to come up with some kind of a plan to address that. our job is not to comment on that, to not to aine on it, not to offer suggestions on what they do. that's up to them. our job is to achieve 2% inflation, and that's what we're going to do, and so we're going to do what we need to do to achieve the Dual mandate goals that Congress has given us, given the rest of the macro environment that we are recipients of, and that fiscal path is part of the macro environment that we we are recipients of, and so that's going to be the job of Treasury and the Congress to sort out, and we will do what we need to do to achieve our dual mandate goals. if you get too much volatility in the treasury market. would you stop the balance bance sheet runoff? uh, I think, for me, the the bar of stopping the balance sheet runoff would be quite High. I mean, we've done it in the past, in the last time when we uh, 2019- when we were shrinking our balance sheet- we're the only Central Bank in the world shrinking their balance sheet after the great financial crisis- and then we were draining reserves out of the banking system. we had, I think, overestimated, underestimated how many reserves the banks were going to require, and you ended up seeing volatility in the treasury market and then the federal funds rate. and then we stopped, we stepped in and intervened at that point. um, I think we've gotten better and we're going to be able to avoid that this time, but my judgment is we still have a ways to go before the FED is done shrinking our balance sheet. so, if there is a lot of volatility, to be clear, would you intervene in the market? it would. it'll depend on how extreme the volatility is. ultimately, Financial stability is part of our mandate and financial stability is. the treasury market is part of that, but I think the bar for me would be quite high before we would change our path if president-elect Trump tries to pressure the FED to lower rates and the FED doesn't feel that that is the correct course of action. how would the FED respond? uh, my colleagues and I are totally committed to achieving the goals that Congress has assigned us- maximum employment and 2% inflation- and we're going to conduct monetary policy to achieve that. and the thing is, you know, the Federal Reserve was designed by Congress in 1913 with specific institutional structures in place to provide continuity. so the governors in Washington get up to 4 14e terms- 14 years, it's a long time. that provides continuity. the 12 Reserve Bank presidents are independently appointed. that also provides continuity. and so I'm confident that we will continue to focus on achieving our economic goals and not responding to whatever pressures might be coming from Washington. if the president-elect tries to push out Fed chair J pal, what will the fomc do? would the fomc try to rally around to keep him in place? you know, I'm going to defer. the chairman asked answered this question last week in his press conference and I'm going to defer to his his comments there. I don't have anything to add to that, all right. uh, I want to Circle back to tariffs for a second, because the last time Trump was in office he had slapped tariffs on China and in that environment- granted, was a different economic environment- we saw slowing growth, but you guys were lowering rates and there's a common belief that tariffs could be inflationary and therefore interest rates could go up. so my question to you is: is that necessarily the case, given what we've seen? just you know, some six years ago, well as I, we were talking about a few minutes ago, I, I think the analysis of a one-time tariff is pretty clear that that's just a step change in the price level. people will pay higher prices, but that doesn't mean inflation is higher going forward. the real question is the tit fortat between countries. if they go back and forth escalating tariffs on each other, that could lead to a longer term inflationary Dynamic. uh, that we we'd have to consider at that point. point, I really think it's going to depend on the Dynamics of what's Happening, as opposed to just, uh, this hypothetical. if you did see more inflationary Dynamics, would that cause you to consider hiking rates or would you be looking more towards a lengthy pause? uh, it's going to depend on so many different things. I mean, ultimately, we have our goals- maximum employment and stable prices- and we're committed to achieving them and we will use the tools that we have to achieve them. any last thoughts: when it comes to the trajectory for monetary policy as we get to December and next year, I would just say the US economy is in a good place. uh, We've cut interest rates by 75 basis points to try to bring it- uh, back down closer to a neutral environment. we're not at neutral yet. we're still in a, in my judgment, we're still in a modestly contractionary stance, But ultimately the economy will guide us in terms of how far we end up needing to go. the labor market is strong. we want to keep it strong, but we need to get inflation all the way back down to 2% and I'm confident we can do that. Neil, thank you so much for your Insight. so appreciate you being here today. thanks for having me.