https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCjw93sODzY

2024 Institute Research Conference

Raphael Bostic

the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis's Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute

Oct 03, 2024

uh, thank you, Abby, for the the, the warm introduction. this, actually this, this appearance- is actually years in the making. I think the first invitation came like two and a half years ago, and trying to get calendars and things together, uh, was difficult, but I'm really glad to be here, so I have some prepared remarks and then we. I'm looking forward to the conversation. so, good morning, and thanks to the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and especially the team at the opportunity and inclusive growth Institute for putting this conference together and for inviting me to participate. as I said, it's great to be here and, um, I'm I'm really excited to be talking about these issues and to uh get to see the community that is working on this stuff in the system. the pursuit of inclusive economic growth is at the center of much of my work, uh, and it's a soapbox issue for me. at a personal level, economic inclusion has been a theme from my earliest days in the economics profession. a chapter of my dissertation, which was also my job Market paper, focused on better understanding discrimination and mortgage lending, and my initial job as a PhD Economist at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors focused on efforts to increase access to capital for those living in lower income and minority neighborhoods and for minority and women-owned small businesses. some years and a few career stops later, I joined the Atlanta fed. in Atlanta, we use the tagline everyone's economy, which I often modify to an economy that works for everyone, and that mission is grounded in promoting broad opportunity and inclusive economic growth. as you probably know, Congress bestowed us with a dual mandate: to promote price stability and maximum employment for the entire population. and here let me say that I think of the employment mandate as a charge to Foster sustainable maximum employment. and sustained employment is crucial because unstable employment, where one gets a job and then loses a job and repeats that cycle, is so very disruptive for individuals and households and, by extension, for communities. now, one way we get to sustainable maximum employment is by maximizing human capital. thus, my conception of sustainable maximum employment envisions an economy in which everyone who wants a job can find not just a job, but a job that allows them to use their talents and training to the fullest and earn a family supporting Income. At Its core, sustainable maximum employment is about expanding opportunity. when we achieve our dual Mandate of stable prices and sustainable maximum employment, the result is a more vibrant and inclusive economy, an economy that works for everyone. now, several years ago, our bank embarked on a strategic planning exercise and one outcome of that effort was identifying increasing economic mobility and resilience as a strategic priority. this appealed at the time and continues to appeal at our bank because in my view, there's a direct link between our employment mandate and economic mobility and resilience. a household's economic mobility and resilience begins with a job and it continues and strengthens when a householder keeps a job. so if we do better in attaining sustainable maximum employment, we will also be making progress in expanding economic mobility and resilience. and, more broadly, I believe that the case is clear for pursuing economic inclusion, mobility and resilience. inequities put a ceiling on opportunity for millions of Americans. limitations for workers limit employment, which limits the economic prospects of businesses, which in turn constrains local, Regional and National economies. now we don't know where the next innovator, the next great entrepreneur or the next brilliant researcher is coming from. so we need to spread opportunity as broadly as possible to ensure that we are not leaving potential untapped. now you all know the research, but to quickly site a couple of prominent studies, president Mary Daly of the San Francisco fed and co-authors estimated that the racial and ethnic gaps in the in Economic Opportunity cost the US economy almost $3 trillion do a year in output, and another study by the USC dor equity research institute, policy link and burning glass Technologies showed that eliminating racial inequities and incomes could boost annual output by more than $2 trillion. now these are enormous numbers even in a$2- 25 trillion economy, and the lost economic potential could grow even larger in coming years, given that racial and ethnic minorities are projected to make up a largest share of the US population in the in the decades to come. gaps in Opportunity happen not just along racial and ethnic Dimensions, though. as one example, the rural urban divides are Stark in many parts of the country, as the evolution of our economy over the past half century toward the service sector and white collar jobs has disproportionately benefited metropolitan areas. so we should be thinking about these things in as broad away as possible. now many of you are part of the Federal Reserve System, so presumably you know what we do to try and broaden economic inclusion, and numerous elements must interact to make sustainable, maximum employment a reality, including, for example, having a quality education system and strong Workforce Development programs. now most of you also probably understand that the Federal Reserve cannot Direct ly, access or address these sorts of structural economic issues. monetary policy, after all, is not well suited to Target particular barriers to opportunity or specific populations or economic sectors. yet there are things we can do. obviously we conduct Research into economic disparities, and there will be several instances of that on display at this conference. this conference is also an excellent demonstration of another thing that we do, namely convene the best thinkers and practitioners to develop a deeper understanding of, and explore solutions to important challenges. we can also promote, by lifting up efforts that have proven effective in a particular local, spreading the word about policies and programs where the evidence shows there's been a positive impact. now, in that spirit, let me briefly talk about a couple of areas where the Atlanta fed has had, or is seeking to have a significant positive impact. our bank has built an initiative we call advancing careers for low-income families. our team has conducted pretty groundbreaking research that shines a light on benefits Cliffs that historically have functioned as huge disincentives for people in lower wage occupations to pursue training and education, to climb a career ladder and to achieve self-sufficiency, economic mobility and resilience. the findings of This research served as one basis for important state legislation in Florida that broadens eligibility for the state's public children's health insurance program truly groundbreaking the development and our team has formed Partnerships with Workforce agencies and other groups across the country who are seeking similar breakthroughs to improve economic inclusion and self-sufficiency. I'd like to quickly mention another aspect of the efforts of the Atlanta fed and our sister Reserve Banks to open the door doors of economics and finance fields to populations that, by and large, have historically not considered these fields as opportunities and options for them. our economic education program is trying to inform and reshape K through 12 curricula so that people from all walks of life hear about economics and finance early in their lives and understand that they can access these fields and that there is a range of occupations at places like the FED that tap into economic knowledge. in our teaching recruiting efforts we're pivoting in a concerted effort to reach out to schools that train large numbers of people from communities under repesentative in in in economics and finance. now, the goal of these initiatives is not to get to everyone to fall in love with economics. rather, the idea is to just to get more people to know about economics and to view it as a viable career choice and make them aware that you can find jobs other than being PhD research Economist- not that there's anything wrong with that. ultimately, people need to choose Pursuits they are passionate about, and you simply won't know if you develop a passion for something if you've never been exposed to it. now I want to also commend the work of our host, the opportunity and inclusive growth Institute. I think this work has been nothing short of exemplary. now, while there's a lot that's going on in The Institute, I'd like to give a particular shout out to the database that Abby mentioned, the income distributions and Dynamics in America resource, which is expanding access to the powerful information that lives within administrative data. now, for many, that term- administrative data- sounds hopelessly dry. not me. I love administrative data, actually, uh. but as you know, administrative data is truly critical to what we're about in this work, and that's because it can represent very high quality data, and we are all aware of how difficult it often is to find high quality data when conducting studies into economic disparities. now, I've long had the view that evidence-based research is essential to effective policy, and it's been a principle that has guided me throughout my professional life. we need sound research to undergird policy that seeks to reduce and eliminate barriers to Economic Opportunity, because, in important respects, the best ways to address economic dis arities are still not well understood, and those knowledge gaps are among the reasons the nation has made only incremental progress on key dimensions of inequality. one quick example: the most recent survey of consumer finances from the Board of Governors, which is the 2022 Edition, tells us that the median white family in America holds more than six times the wealth of the typical black family, and that Gap has not narrowed much over several decades. now, everyone here can help. I think every person in this room has the potential to deepen our understanding of how our nation can dismantle barriers to opportunity, and over the next two days, we will together explore Research into important puzzles, including gaps in retirement wealth accumulation, the effects of of home on home ownership of institutional investors in the single family home rental business, the impact on income inequality of geographic differences and inflation, and much more. now you have the agenda, so I'm not going to recite all of it, uh. but if I can take a speaker's prerogative and brag for a moment, uh, you will hear from two Atlanta fed economists today who I'm sure are going to Dazzle you, uh. David wixer will discuss a paper on disability insurance that he co-authored with Timothy Moore of Purdue University and Amanda misho, a Minneapolis vet Economist and organizer of this conference. and right after Neil and I finished, and Amanda does a little opening remarks, another of our economists, Veronica pakova, will present work on the origins of business formations. it's good to see you both here and I'm really proud to see that you're uh have prominent roles in this program. now, surpris it to say we're in for a couple of days of thought-provoking discussion, and this is super exciting. when leading thinkers get together and wrestle with important questions, it can yield key clues for broadening inclusion and opportunity. now I hope I've helped the frame what's to come, and I hope you're excited about this program as I am. I want you all to enjoy the conference and participate fully. now I'm going to go sit over here uh for what I think will be an interesting and Lively chat, as it always is, with my friend and colleague, Neil Kashkari. thank you very [Applause]. much thank you, Raphael. that was great. um, really. let me just uh add to aby's thanks. really appreciate you coming out here today, uh for this conference. um, let me start with this. you know the uh opportunity inclusive growth Institute is taking these huge issues facing society and we have in the room Health experts, uh, people in education, people focusing on criminal justice. almost every aspect of American life is somehow woven into these issues. so I'm just curious: you, as a re researcher, how do you decide where to begin? so that's a big question, um, for me, I I think, well, I'll tell it from my, my, my background, my perspective. so in my career, uh, there were areas that I had passion in, so I cared about access to Capital, mortgage flows, those sorts of things, and then I had to marry that with the data that I felt that I could get access to. so for my dissertation, uh, it was right after the Boston fed had collected all that information from the banks about their underwriting rules and tools and it was publicly available. so I, I, in those days, you actually had to call them. uh, the email wasn't so good, uh, and they sent me a floppy disc with the data on it and I downloaded all of it and just started running analysis to try to see if there were aspects of it that I hadn't seen people working on or or revealing. um and so. so that would that would. that's kind of how I think about. so I like to live in my passion spaces. I feel like that's the only way I'm really going to get through, like the hard parts of research, when your programs aren't converging or you're seeing bugs or all those sorts of things, uh, and so that was essential. but then it's also trying to be creative about, like, where you think there might be data and then, uh, being persuasive to try to convince people to give you that data. it's one of the reasons why I think that the added data Bas is really important, because then then that part of the effort has been handled already and you can spend much more of your time and your focus on the questions to be answered. uh, but it's it's an ongoing thing and, you know, one of the things I've been trying to encourage uh businesses and uh public sector agencies is that they should be thinking about their data as a resource to help them and, as you think about how you collect it, how you store it, how you manipulate it, put the research component into this to make it easier for all of us to to be helpful, because when researchers learn things, uh, and they bring it back, it can actually help these programs work better and it can help the outcomes be better as well. so that makes a lot of sense. but now think about- I get it from a individual graduate students perspective, uh, which you were very clear on- what about you're now? you've been president Atlanta fed for quite a while now. um, How do you think about guiding the Atlanta fed now? you've got the resources of the Atlanta fed and the Federal Reserve System behind you, how do you think about where to focus? so I don't, um, uh, one of the things that I I try to do, I I feel like I'm an aggregator of perspectives and viewpoints. I go out, I talk to a lot of people and I try to ask: like, what are you struggling with? what are the things that you're worrying about? uh, I bring those things back. so my, my job, I I think, is really to just was, uh, give a picture of where people are struggling, where people see there opportunities, where people have hopes or wishes that things could work better, uh, and then just put them out there. and then you know I have a great team. I talked about a couple of them earlier. Karen capek is here. she used to be with us as well. um, they all will know I'm well, I hope they know and get a sense of which of these issues are closer in their passion spaces to where they might be able to advance things moving forward. you know, as you noted, it's a super complicated World. there are so many different fields, there are so many different details and institutional knowledge that that you could have that trying to to have insight to say that's the one that will make the difference or that one will. I don't think that's helpful. it's really going to be everybody coming together, uh, and it'll be the, the aggregation of all that knowledge, that that that works. you know, related to that, one of the initial ideas of The Institute was to have a very broad mandate related to these topics but in intentionally invite people Beyond just economists to the table because there's so much knowledge and expertise that they bring that historically as a Federal Reserve System I don't think we have fully appreciated or embraced, and so I'm really happy that we have economists here today, but we also have other experts. so can I just speak to that? um, totally agree with that. one of my um, the best class I I taught my favorite class that teach when I was a professor was a class I team taught with historian and it was about Urban economics, but the histo, the history lens, kind of lifted up a different set of things that that history happens in in sequence and in context, and there are all of these uh uh relationships that will drive the setting by which policy gets pursued, the, the way that programs or potential initiatives might be articulated or considered. and if you're not totally aware of that, then you can miss things in terms of how you might design, uh an analysis, because, uh, no initial context is is totally random, and having an appreciation for that moving forward is is quite important. U so I, I love, I love the multidisiplinary. my undergrad I was a psych, an econ person, right, so I already had some uh predisposition to that, but it's, it's really interesting. we can have a long conversation about that. um, I'm going to keep going, though, because I want to make sure we have time for the uh audience. uh, of the topics, of all the topics that one could approach, I know- and you you touched on it in your remarks- the benefits Cliff work is really is a signature issue for the Atlanta fed. how did the Atlanta fed get into that work? um, you gave an example of where it's making a real impact. where do you see it going. so this actually started before I got there and there were uh. so. so Dave volik, who was the research dor at the time, had this passion about trying to understand sort of what were true barriers to families, uh, and moving to self-sufficiency, and um, he worked with some private sector folks to build a tool that could actually kind a map out the trajectory of, uh, of your income if you were, were participating in different mixes of social welfare programs, so housing, velur, child insurance, you know all those sort of things, um, and they could show, sort of when you get to a certain level, because these programs are being tested, you get an extra dollar you start to to your progress slows or sometimes Falls backwards. and they started mapping this and they would bring it out and talk to folks and they people didn't know, like they weren't aware that the incentives were such that people were were locked in, not because they didn't want to be better, but because the incentives made it L. but the participants figured it out, they, the policymakers, did the participants, oh no, they did the math, right, like and then? and so we actually started doing math and we would ask the question: well, okay, suppose someone worked through the cliff anyway and decided to make themselves better. how long would it be before they broke even? and? and many places it was 10 years, 12 years, 15 years, and that's not viable, like it's not reasonable to ask someone to do that. if you've got children, you got to support, if you got like elderly people and all those sorts of things, that is not the rational decision, that actually not getting make better, bettering yourself, is rational. then we did one other thing, which was we asked the question: did the thought experiment? well, suppose you had two people who are identical, one you decided to pay to fill in the Gap and the other you didn't. who do you spend more money on? and it turns out you spend more money over the lifetime of that person for the one you don't fill in the Gap, right? so if there's a fiscal cost to this in addition, add to sort of a self-sufficiency and a social cost, and once people saw that, they were like: well, we got, we're going to do something about this immediately. and that's triggered all of these Partnerships and under memor understanding that we've had, because now all these counties and a lot of these rules are set, the variation happens at the county level. um, they want to figure out how, how to not do that, and so the Florida um action was to sort of not make the penalty on the children's health insurance be acute, so they raised the poverty threshold to 300% of the state poverty level from 200%, and the difference between being covered and not covered in terms of a premium was going from something like $300 to $3,000. wow, right, it was sufficiently large that nobody was going to cross that threshold because the extra income wasn't going to be enough, right? and so it's that kind of stuff that has been uh very interesting, and the team has been uh quite creative in presenting this in ways to make people understand, like to talk about it in their domains. so they get it and, and you know, so much of this is the analysis plus a communication strategy that makes the issue or the solution compelling, and so you've got to have that, that partnership, excellent. I've got two more questions, then I'm gonna. we're going to turn to the audience you touched on in your remarks. uh, challenges in urban centers, challenges in rural communities. we face that dramatically. in the nth Federal Reserve District. we've had these big cities for us- Minneapolis, St Paul- and a lot of Ural, uh areas around us curious. what do you see? what are some of the common challenges? what are some of the different challenges? yes, so there's so many um, so one is just having an infrastructure in place that can support the way business happens today. uh, the most obvious element there is broadband, so so many businesses require, on having that technological uh connectivity, and Broadband doesn't exist in robust ways in a lot of rural places it's hard to get out there, like just the business model for a private company to do this doesn't really work, correct, uh, and so you need to find some way to subsidize it and policy is trying to address that uh. Second thing is- and that actually leads into a second thing- which is trying to create, um, the possibility that the Next Generation sees opportunities located locally. right, so one of the concerns is when children are growing up, they think, well, where am I going to get a job like? that's going to be interesting, allow me to progress. if they don't have BR band, if you, if you don't have the Innovation, if you don't have the entrepreneurship that's visible and local, then they're going to say I got to go somewhere, and that then leads to runs, the risk of leading to the spiral where the place can't be sustaining on its own. uh, another area that I hear a lot about um is child care. um, and it's particularly important because, because the population is far less so you, so you can't just assume that there are going to be neighbors that might be able to watch the kids or any of those sorts of things. so the existence and presence of these institutions is quite important. and then the, the last one I would just talk about, is Health Care. um, so across this country, in my district- and I'm sure this is everywhere, like, hospitals are closing in rural places, you can't get a lot of the important health care that You' need to have, and that then then becomes a a challenge, for can you stay there, like, if you can't get the health care that you think you're going to need or your family's going to need, like you might need to do a different calculus to figure that out, and so finding solutions for all of these is, um is of Paramount importance if we're going to close this divide. uh, I'll just say, in the child care, I think there's a huge opportunity if someone could develop a business model to deliver child care in these type of places. I think there's a communication aspect to this. there a coordination aspect of this, there a a certification aspect of this. if someone could figure all that out, the the challenge is so ubiquitous in these areas, I think, um, it would be very interesting, all right, well, we could have a long conversation about that, because I've got two very young children, so I'm in the childcare market and have analyzed this in some depth. well, you could be the one, you could be the one. I don't think it's solvable, uh, by the private Market. it's like, um, I'll give you just a quick riff. at the same time that child care costs for families are so high, High childcare wages are very low. those two things seem to be intention. well, it's because the more you make it a living wage, the less affordable it becomes for families. so it's like: why does every country in the world subsidize agriculture? because they want high prices for farmers and low prices for consumers. those two things are directly intention. so the only way to square the circle is with some form of subsidy, otherwise it's just impossible. the private sector cannot solve it on its own. my conclusion: I'm not advocating anything, I'm just making economic observation. this is lived experience, experience. I finally tried to cut through what I think is kind of like a gordian knot. last question for you is: you talked about maximum sustainable employment. since we've both been on the at the Federal Reserve roughly the same amount of time before the pandemic, the fomc, US included, kept getting surprised that the unemployment rate went lower down to 3.5% and we didn't see inflation. now we're at 4.2% unemployment and we all think we're somewhere around maximum employment. I'm just curious, in the Arc of what you've learned in the last eight years or so, how do you think about maximum sustainable employment and how will we know it when we're there? so I I saved the hardest question for last. yeah, this is. this is a big question, um, so let me just say I think that there is sort of a short-run maximum employment and then there's the real maximum employment potential. right, so you could take where everybody is in their human capital and where they are in their employment as fixed and that will Define one level of Maximum employment. but the question that I always ask myself is: would I, am I happy with that? or should we be striving to do better and improve people's productivity, get them into better matches, get them better human capital, such that The Benchmark will actually move, and I think, if we do our job well, the Benchmark should move, and I think one of the things that we've learned is that there has been movement right. so, like when I started- well, when I started being an economist, the idea of of the natural weight of unemployment was well as north of 5%. it could be almost 6%. now, when I started, here was 4.4, we got to 3.4, right. so it's obvious that the notion of what this is, uh is evolving and shifting. it shifts with technology, it shifts with how we provide supports, and so, for me, I I view the exercise as trying to reduce something equivalent to a dead weight loss, like: to what extent can we um position every person so that they are their best self, that they are having doing the best work of their life, the best produc productivity of their life, and if that happens, then our econom is stronger, our econom is bigger, our econom is more resilient and our job actually gets a whole lot easier. there's less that we have to do and so so. so that's how I think about now. everyone always then wants to say, well, what's the number right? I don't really know what the number is right, but I know that the number could be lower, right, and you were a strong Voice through the that period when we were getting below four, to say, let's not, let's not jump to a conclusion. uh, because our institution has historically been preemptive, correct, right, and not allowed those, those last few people, to, to get jobs. and then, and then we learned, if you let them do it and you manage well, those can actually be sustainable jobs. uh, and so to me, I think this is an area that we need to continue to be focused on thinking about and being creative, to try to find ways of how to quantify this and to, um, find the places. you know I use the phrase. an economy that works for everyone, it naturally flips to. well, for whom is the economy not working? and that's where our potential is like. that's the space where we can actually close that Gap and get much more to that. that real, a Highest Potential number, wonderful, all right, let's open it up to our experts in the audience who might have questions or a couple microphones around shy group this morning. okay, I can keep going. um, you know you talk about, uh, the urban, rural divide. what you described in your district is almost exactly what I experience traveling around our district and I'm just curious: healthcare, for example. you talked about that. hospitals are closing. hospitals are closing here too, um, but here technology is showing some promise of closing some of those gaps or increasing access. you don't have a specialist in your town, but maybe through technology you can actually access that specialist. are you seeing progress there? yes, so that that the telea, health and the use of technology- has been very, very interesting, um, and this is like with all these, these different Frontiers: you see the opportunities, but then you also learn new challenges, right? so, so, um, definitely the potential to use people's phones, people's laptops for apps, for having appoint appointments, for having communication, that all is has increased the challenge we have. so, yes, so we, we need to see that and we need to see that become more sophisticated, more Nuance, more Innovative, um, and all those things. the challenge is that it then requires, like a, a level of personal self-discipline that I think can be challenging, like we know that, um, many, many of our health issues are not because people don't get the medicines, is that they don't follow, take the medicines or follow the protocols as U? um ruthlessly as they might otherwise. and so then the next challenge is: and how do you use, use, how do you um incentivize that? how do you create processes to address that in this new domain? and so there's all that learning that's going to happen. that I, I think it can be done, um, but it is, it's going to take work, it's going to take investment and, um, I mean, I'm actually fairly optimistic on this because it covers such a wide area and I think policy makers will be able to gain consensus on this because it's everywhere and that's quite interesting. one other thing, just jumping around, uh, just because it's partially in your District, obviously, the hurricane- very big news. you know a lot of damage, especially in North Carolina, which I know is not in your District. I'm just curious: what kind of reports are you all getting from around your region in terms of the effect and how are people navigating it? yeah, so my district has been facing these sorts of things with increasing frequency, uh, and so when I first started, uh, there had never been in a hurricane that a storm that had gotten to Atlanta and was Hurricane strength. um, I started in June, in September, the first time was the first time that it ever happened. it's 2017, uh, and then you have Helen, which is like this massive Storm Into the Appalachian mountains which, amazing, is not close to the ocean right, uh, and yet the storm can still have that kind of power. to me it's really causing everyone like what I'm seeing is. is it really causing everyone to to rethink what their relationship to risk is and how geography plays a role in it? so I've talked to a number of people in the last month and a half who are either rethinking their decision to buy something on the coast or regretting their decision to buy something on the coast because they didn't appreciate how powerful and how rapidly the dynamic has evolved. right, you used to have where you thought you had 50 yards of sand that was going to be a bunker. up is not that much as much of a bunker as people have thought and- and that has real implications, I think, for how all these places are going to work. so I was talking just with someone yesterday that whole area in North Carolina around Asheville. um, there are going to be some hard decisions that have to be uh made about, like how viable is the place if this sort of thing could possibly happen again? but if it it could happen there, it could happen in a lot of different places. that's correct, and so, um you. one thing I've been um hopeful for is that uh, people in uh throughout the country actually uh take on board the experiences of their neighbors a bit more in making judgments about what their action should be, what kind of precautions they should take, how should they think about their um, their posture. that hasn't happened as much as I would like, and you know there have been, as I said, there have been these giant storms coming across the Gulf Coast, and my District covers the whole Gulf Coast except for Texas, and then I have also uh part of Tennessee, um and um, I'm not, there's not as much mitigation as I think one could do, and you know, at some point I hope that people kind of step back and say, collectively, we've got to figure out what we want for our community and how are we going to make it more resilient against these things? uh, and that'll be really important here in our region, I'm sorry. let me just say one of thing: what we are seeing, which I which is important, is that the private sector is making choices as well. right, so, in Florida, in Florida and other parts of the, the, our district, insurance rates have gone up a lot like 300%, 400%, adding thousands of dollars of cost, because there's math there, right? so if, if their Actuarial tables- I guess not actu table, but their risk tables- were, you know, the storm of that magnitude and that loss is only going to happen once every 70 years, and now it's happened three times in five years, those premium don't work anymore, like you will go out of business. so so the just the economics of it means that the economics of living in these places is going to change and- and that's not a policy thing like that's a business thing, right, and you know businesses are going to start. I think think we're going to see more and more of that in the years to come, because I I don't think these storms are going to stop happening. so it's interesting- you say that because we have a couple Insurance CEOs on our board of directors and we talked to other members of the insurance industry and I asked them. I say, can you explain to me why are premiums in our region going up so much? we don't have hurricanes here, thankfully, uh, and they say, yeah, but it's a national market and so, yes, the the storms that are affecting the gulf coast, forest fires, they're actually getting spread out across the country. so that's one of the factors that's driving, uh premiums up all over the country. so it, it definitely is a. it's a big problem. it's getting folks attention for sure. uh, let me last. we got two minutes left. any remaining questions that folks have? I see one over there, go ahead, Eric, HST University of Chicago. so when you're talking earlier about, um, thinking about the, you know, sustainable and unemployment, what, why the unemployment right now as your target? i' I've talked to Andre about it yesterday. today it there seems to be a much bigger class of people on the margin between working and not working. um, and so are we thinking about, you know, these kind of employment rate movements as a potential other metric? and when you start thinking about that, things make a little bit more sense when you're looking at the full, uh, the full group of potential workers. so that's a very good point and a very good question. I would say, um, there's not any one measure that defines sustainable maximum employment. but when you talk to regular people, labor force participation rate doesn't mean much to them, right? so so like there are a lot of the things that we would use as measures of sort of penetration, growth, Health, Vitality, of all those things. but, um, that's inside baseball and everybody knows what an unemployment rate is, and so using that as one of the benchmarks is going to be useful, but we should not ignore any of the other things. and, and you know, for me I I'm actually trying to ask person to person, like: what are your skills, what's your job, what's your attachment, like that. that's sort of the metric um to think about, sort of how well these labor markets are, are performing. I would just add: so, Andre, and our team here has heard me on this point for years- because when I first started, a friend of mine, who's now the deceased late great Eddie lazir, labor Economist, called me and basically said: you guys at the fend you to stop talking about the unemployment rate. it's meaningless, you should be focusing on epop because it takes out the psychological analysis of what, whether or not I'm in the labor market. and he just pounded me on that and so it's something that, uh, I think he was right. I'm not saying that employment rate is meaningless, but eepop is a very important measure because when you see so many flows from out of the labor force into a job, right, that in theory that shouldn't happen, but a lot of people move from out of the labor force into the job, and so I think employment to population measures are very important, but I agree with Rafael, we have to look at all of it. there's a question over here: hi uh Abu uh from NYU. so the opportunity to own a house, especially for young households, is, we is a certainly an issue currently, but I wanted to, just from your work and from how you see it now, whether this is more of a policy issue now or a market issue. housing affordability: is it a policy issue now or just the market? um, there a lot of Market in the sense that that the Big Challenge we have is an imbalance between supply and demand, right, so we don't have enough units for the number of people in most of the places where we're seeing growth, and that's putting a lot of pressure on things. um. that said, um the- the cost to do things actually is not irrelevant, right, and so it can in influence the uh intensity by which people are experiencing things, uh, and sort of make the that that larger Dynamic feel more acute in, in, in places. uh. I think, though you know, it's a hard question to ask, it's a hard question to answer, because our charge is not to fix housing markets. our charge is to make the US economy be in a position that um people have certainty about, where it's going to be r large three years from now, five years from now, 10 years from now, which is why we want to have stable prices. um, but it does have implications s on how people are going to experiencing things, experience things. I'm hopeful that in the next several months, as we start to normalize our policy, that the pricing for mortgages uh gets to a level that allows a little more action in those markets. I mean, we're seeing that already. um, financial markets are responding quite quickly. but, um, but we have our charge and we we have to face that. Abby, any final, you had your hand up earlier, microphone's coming to you, did you have a question? so, when we are talking about um maximum employment and you mentioned maximum sustainable employment, I feel like that pulls in the idea that there might be different ways of achieving it, uh, and there might be different, in a sense, levels of Maximum employment as defined by a simple unemployment rate, but things that could look very different in that they impact different types of folks. um, it brought to mind kind of how the, the Full Employment mandate, um originated, and it originated not that long after we started really thinking about human capital and um as a profession. so when you think of the publication dates on human capital papers- not that much before the kind of dual mandate- we now know a lot more about how to generate that and causally um affect that. so I'm just wondering: do you think there's, given when that originated? is there a bit of a mismatch in just institutionally, how we think about full employment as perhaps a single static thing, um, as compared to a, a choice among many equilibria that we can shift with our other policy decisions? is there some mismatch in our own thinking or perhaps a mismatch in how we talk about it with the wider public? yeah, I actually think it's the second um. well, first, we're unusual as a Central Bank in having two mandates- right and the- because originally it was just stable prices. the Dual mandate came in during the Civil Rights era at, as people were concerned that just the basic institutions that were foundational were not thinking about these disparities, um. but then the questiona came up about: how do you measure this? like what does it mean conceptually? how do you provide a framework that allows us and the public r large to know whether we're making progress or not? um, I don't think that it has. well, that's the earlier question noted, we haven't been able to to reduce this down to a number or an index or anything in a way that's comparable to the clarity that we have in the inflation or the, the stable prices, even though, I would note, there are a thousand ways you can measure inflation as well, like we have an underlying inflation dashboard. we show a to them and they don't always say exactly the same thing. um, so I actually think this is an area where research would be useful, like having, uh, some thinking from people who are deep in this space about, sort of, what would this look like? how do you think about talking about the concept of multiple equilibria, and how do you think about, uh, creating consensus on what an appropriate Benchmark is? maybe you start you, maybe there's an Institute that starts a, a project, to say, okay, we're going to measure what we think the, the frontier should look like and how far we are from the frontier, and we're going to update it every two years, three years, for I think there's a lot of hard thinking. uh, that remains to be done to help flesh this out in a way to to make it actionable where, uh, everybody understands it. I think we are over our time, uh, so please, everybody, join me in thanking Rafel for his remarks today.

