https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9bl2Q5qDnVQ

Atlanta Fed President Sits with Shares Podcast to Talk Economy

Raphael Bostic

the American College of Financial Services College’s 2024 Conference of African American Financial Professionals

Aug 13, 2024

[Music]. welcome to shares from the American College of financial services. where money meets Minds. here's a look at what we'll be sharing with you today. what we were seeing is that, though the Top Line number was coming down in the last year, the breath of inflation was still quite high. and that is a worry, worrisome sign because it says then if the breath ofl is high, then maybe it's some idiosyncratic low number that's masking what's really going on. what's happened in the last couple of months is that that breath is starting to get back into normaliz zones. hello everyone. my name is John mananero and I'm a senior reporter with think advisorcom. we're coming at you today live from the floor of the American College of financial services 2024 Conference of African-American Financial professionals. it's the industry's largest and longest standing Gathering of black, African-American and Dei committed Financial professionals. I just want to say a personal thank you to the college and it's Center for economic empowerment and equality for hosting us at the event. I also want to thank uh Dr bosk for for being here. it's a true honor to get to speak to you. I can't imagine how busy you are, how much maybe pressure you're under in your day-to-day work. so personally I just wanted to say thank you for the time today. hope you're doing well. I'm doing very well. you're very welcome. I'm always happy to do these things. it's important for us to get out in front and talk to folks, that they know what we're doing. agreed, we just uh heard a wonderful keynote session between you and and George Nicholls discussing some of the same stuff we'll talk about today, but it was really amazing to be in that room with, you know, thousands of of financial professionals, predominantly African-American. I wanted to ask you a question just about what it's like to be the first, you know, black president of the of the Atlanta fed. um, you told the story a little bit, but I think our readers, you know, should hear it. yeah, so you know it's very interesting. um, being the president of the bank was not not on my list of things I would do next and you know, the opportunity came up. I put my name in and uh was fortunate enough to be selected. um, the experience of being the first black president has been quite interesting. there are really two aspects to it, so one: I've got to actually be the best president I can be. I don't want to be the black president, I want to be the great president, who happens to be black, of course, and so I'm doing the best that I can to uh to live that and and be uh ruthless and in research and preparation and really try to have insights that are helpful. but the other part I would say that is also quite interesting is that, uh, when I go out and talk to folks, there's just a tremendous excitement. you know, I'm not much of a picture taker- more PE, I have been in more selfies in this job than I would ever have imagined. at the end of an event, people just want to come and just be seen with me. um, and I don't think it's because of my looks. I think it's, it's because you know there's a you never know well, you do never know, but there's there's a history to it. um, that is exciting and for so many people you know, they tell me I never imagined I would ever see someone who looked like you or looked like me in this role and it's just, it's changed what I thought was possible in ways that really excite me, and so that's been, it's been a wonderful thing. and you know, I people ask: well, why do you do all these pictures? and I say you, it's rare that you see people in joyous moments and so for me I'm like I don't want to just snuff that out, like if people are happy and they're excited, I want to to indulge that and and really Revel and let that excitement carry, carry through. so it's been very interesting, um, I mean, there are challenges, of course. I get asked different questions, uh, than some of my colleagues would, um, but you know that's been true for a long time, so you get used to that and uh really is about uh, trying to do the best that I can every day. yeah, I appreciate that because you know I I get the opportunity to travel and and go to different conferences and and this is a really special place. so I appreciate you sort of answering that question and and telling me that that story, um, one thing I did want to ask you about the sort of a little history lesson about Atlanta. I I listened to a speech you gave some months ago where you, you know, mentioned the fact that it was about 50 years since mayard Jackson Jr became, you know, the first black mayor of of Atlanta and he also founded the um, the organization known as the nasp. do you feel connected to his legacy? and and just, you know the history of Atlanta in that sense, so you know it's a funny thing, um I I didn't really think about it like that until I did that speech and then it was s like: oh, we do have a connection and the the journey to uh diversity and excellence and a presence in finance and economics is. there's an arc to it and I feel like we are actually continuing that Arc in terms of how we approach what we do and how we talk about it and who we talk about it to. I I've tried very much to make sure that we access uh venues that are not your usual suspect venues. so to go on a serious Urban radio, for example, to try to talk to different collections of people who might not know all the things, who who might not be sort of Wall Street insiders, um, because there that knowledge can be powerful and to the extent that um we are opening doors and creating access and different, improved understandings, that's got be better for everyone and so, um, so it is, it is I'm I'm grateful for uh his efforts and um, hopefully someone will say the same uh for us. you know, 50 years from now I'm sure they will. um, just to talk a little bit about the, the fed, the Federal Reserve itself. I. it was really interesting to hear the interview with George, you know, talking about some of the, the mystery you know behind the fed and how it works. I had a similar question. you know what? just? you're a member of the fomc, the Federal Open markets Commission. what's it like to be in the room with you know, chairman, pal, some of these other you know very influential economists from Across the Nation? you talked about the consensus building process. love to hear about that. but also would would people be surprised by anything that that maybe goes on at an fomc meeting or is it kind of unfold as you would probably imagine? well, you know, having been in the room, I don't know what I imagined. like the like I still remember the first time I was in that room and I had to give my first uh comment on the US economy and I'm sitting across and Janet Yellen is sitting there- she's the chair- and then the. the man sitting next to her is Stan fiser. the first textbook I had in economics was Dorne Bush and Fisher, that's the guy. and I was like what am I doing in this room? like these are real people, uh, but what I learned is that, um, there's a level of respect that everyone has for everyone else, right, and so when I was talking, it was silent and people were was like, oh my God, everyone paying attention, this is amazing, um, but then that means that there are things to learn, and so I really have come to highly regard and respect my colleagues. they bring different insights that make me sometimes rethink sort of where I am or how I think about things, and I, I hope I'm doing the same. like I, I try to bring new information, that that challenges people's ideas and, um, really tries to create a narrative that I think is on point, and we're all trying to do that, and so the thing that's that's been so neat about is that we're all trying to do the same thing, but, like the 12 presidents, we have different districts, right, and so the type of information we're getting is distinct. so so in Atlanta, the six District, the, the- the economy of the sixth district, almost exactly mirrors the US economy, sure? so we are very diverse in all the sectors: we have egg, we have industry, we have Tech, we have military, we have energy. the states are. remind me Florida, uh, so I have all of Florida, all of Georgia, all of Alabama, the bottom half of Mississippi, the bottom half of Louisiana and the Eastern 23s of Tennessee, so the whole Gulf Coast except for Texas. we have Appalachia in Tennessee, like it is extremely diverse. it's really interesting. yeah, I appreciate, I appreciate that. um, you know I don't want to ask about, you know, the next rate cut, because I know that's a question you probably hear about. all it's a personal, personal stand. I'm not going to do it, but what I do, you know, want to hear about is just your, your understanding of where the economy is right now. you gave us some great details on the stage. I think that the point you made about the, the breadth of inflation and and sort of using that measurement to decide where we're at right now, would be a useful thing to share with the audience. maybe you could talk about that, sure, so you know, one of the things that we've really tried to do, because this has been such an unusual economic period, like a pandemic- that doesn't happen, like on ay cyclical basis, all the policy response that doesn't usually happen. the policy response is much larger than what we saw in the great financial crisis right, so it's kind of hard to imagine in hindsight. it's it's, it's really been remarkable, and so what that means is that your Topline numbers might be constructed with a different combination of things, because everything else is so different, so just focusing on the top line uh number might cause you to miss things. so one thing that we've been looking at is how broad inflation is across the entire economy, right, uh, because you know, a high inflation could be three prices that are super high and then everything else is on point, or it could be everything is high. the policy response in those two would be quite different. so what we've done is we've now tried to De, and anyone can do this, so we have an underlying infl inflation dashboard on our website. anybody can see this and these sort of things. but what we've done is we've taken the basket of goods that are used to calculate inflation. so, basically, take you pick like 30 goods and then you just buy that basket every month and see how the prices have changed. um, and you can do it in the aggregate. can you say so, for the 30, I paid $25 or $800 or whatever it is, or you can do it good by good, right, and what we have found is that? um, when you look at it good by good, you can really Cate categorize it. so what percentage of the goods in the basket had inflation above 5%, above 3%, above 1%? um, during most of the pandemic, the share of goods that were above 5% was much, much higher than what you would see under ordinary circumstances and that would just say that inflation is high and Broad. right, and what we were seeing is that, though the Topline number was coming down in the last year, the breath of inflation was still quite high. right, and that is a worry, worrisome sign because it says then, if the breath inflation is high, then maybe it's some idiosyncratic low number. this masking what's really going on, what's happened in the last couple of months is that that breath is starting to get back into normalized zones. so that share of of uh Goods in the basket with above 5% inflation is now around 20%. that's still a little higher than our historical Norm, but it is not the 80% that it was at the height of all of this. and if you look at the percentage of of goods that have inflation above 3%, that's at about 40% now. that's almost exactly where we were in normal times. so it says that a lot of our inflation. the, the underlying Dynamics are really normalizing in ways that would suggest that we should expect to see continued movement back to our 2% Target, which is what really what I'm hoping for. yeah, and that would obviously be a positive thing. the, the goal is to get to 2% of, or that's the longstanding goal. think you've written about it as the, the unquestion goal of of the Federal Reserve. could you talk about the dynamic of of when to cut and and sort of trying to do it ahead of the, ahead of the bottom right? that's the goal. that's the elusive soft Landing that everybody talks about, difficult to achieve. yeah, so I never say the word soft Landing like to describe what I'm trying to do. yeah, uh, but, but here's what I would say: if we wait till we're at 2% to start cutting, then we'll overshoot sure, right, so we're at a restrictive, we're in a restrictive posture now, um, the ideal Dynamic we should see is, when we get to 2%, we should be at neutral, right, right, and so that the question like, when do you start? because it has to be before you're 2%, but you have to be really sure you're going to get there, and you've heard that the chair in the committee has often said, like we need further confidence that we are sustainably on a path of 2%. that is really a statement that we need to be really, really sure we get there. we're going to get there before we start cutting, but we're going to have to do it in advance at some point, um, to me, I think, right now, um, the question is that sustainability, yeah, and on- sorry to interrupt, but on on stage- you said: one month is not a trend right. one month is not a trend right, and so we need to see this, this Dynamic sustain for a while, and, and I'll just say 2024 has been really odd in this context, because the first three months of 2024, all the discussion was: has inflation stalled out or is it going to reverse, like it had not. it had stopped its progress completely and it restarted at the time. it was very worrying at the time, uh, and fortunately it has restarted. but just like one month, sometimes one quarter isn't a trend. so we're just into one quarter of that restarting, um, and so I'm hopeful that the next two or three months will tell us, uh, that it is really on the way, and if that's the case, then I think we'd be positioned, uh, to begin our rate cutting cycle, to get back to S, A More normalized Level. yeah, yeah, the American College of financial services, championing causes, connecting communities, delivering best in class applied Financial knowledge and education for the benefit of professionals like you and for the benefit of society. expand your opportunities at the allnew, the American collegeedu. I would just say on a on a personal level, this the last you know since the co period. it's been a learning opportunity for me. I started my reporting career in 2010 and it was 0%, was Z, was. that was normal for so long. but now here we are with a rate that's, you know, higher than that, obviously, but it's we're about 5%, which is a a lot more. and you? the thing that's interesting is there are many professionals who have never really worked in a said people who are managing other people's money- yeah, who never really been in these type of environments, and I've talked to a lot of banks and they're like we've had to retrain all of our staff on what it means to work in a higher interest rate environment, not because there's never been one, but because there hadn't been one in a long time, and so it's been. it's been a big learning curve. it's been very, quite interesting. yeah, yeah, for sure. I imagine that in your job it might meind a little bit. I feel like I'm learning something new from really smart people every day. I don't, I don't know if at this point you you still feel like you're learning and it's. I learn something every day and you know, it's one of the things that makes a job really rich. that, um, we go and ask folks who are doing real things how are they experiencing it, and almost all the time is something new, like and, and that that really does help inform things. one of the things I've been really grateful about in this job is that people just tell me the truth, right, so they know that we're trying to do something to help them be more successful and, as a consequence, I don't, I don't get caution, I don't get suspicion. people are actually quite positive and open and transparent, and that really helps me be better in terms of having a sense of where the economy is. sure, yeah, you get the opportunity to. you know, call up Business Leaders, call up people who are in the community, in the economy, and that's great to hear that, that they're forthright with you. I think that's essential. it is essential, and you know I do that. one of the things that's unique about our bank is that we have a team of people who get paid to do that. we call them our regional economic Information Network, and all they do all day long is sounds like a cool job- is have unstructured conversations with Business Leaders and Community leaders about what they're seeing, where the risks are, where the opportunities are, and it really grows out of a reality that so often a trend will start before it shows up in the aggregate data. sure, and if the trend is a big one and you don't see it, wait, you don't notice it till it's in the data. you, there's a risk of being late. and I think about the great financial crisis. the FED, right before Fanny and Freddy collaps, said that housing is not a thing- you don't have to worry about this, um, and yet I'm pretty sure folks were seeing a lot of risk out there. we just didn't have a way to to get that information, so we changed that and um, and it's been very helpful through the pandemic. as you know, things change so rapidly and they continue to, yeah, and that you made that point very well on stage that you know the FED has really been successful in in sort of avoiding some of those issues and and really staying ahead of the ahead of the curve. so we're trying. I mean, that didn't happen every time, but we're doing our best. yeah, it's, there's always issues or perhaps things that could have been done better, but I I think that that came through well. you know, hindsight is 2020 and you know, I do think a lot of times people can look back and forget that they know things that weren't known at the time of the decision needed to be made. so, yeah, you kind of have to have be a little bit of a duck and let the water roll off your back and and just keep your head down and keep, keep doing what you can. yeah, I love the, the anecdote you told on stage just about maybe walking down the aisle at the grocery store and people calling you the rate guy. oh, all the time, all the time, they're like that, that's him, that's him. yeah, it's, on one hand, flattering to be recognized, but, on the other hand, you're much more than that. I, I think it's fair to say: well, I mean that. yes, I would agree with that. yeah, um, a couple more questions for you and again, I I'm really grateful for your time here. this is an honor for me to get to speak with you in in this formal setting and and just it was great to hear the the presentation on stage as well. but when you, when you just think about retirement in in the US economy, my my beat for think adviser is retirement, and it's what I find every day is. I can write about anything or I can speak to so many different people and tie it back to what it means to to retire. what that, what retirement is to our economy and to our society? you know, as a, as a member of the fomc, as a, as a the president of, you know the Atlanta fed. what does retirement mean to you? oh, so that's a very interesting question. I I'll say a couple things. so one, retirement is an important stage of a person's life and it's a transition in many. it can be a transition in many regards, from being in the labor force to not, and, and, to the extent that happens in a regular flow. um, that helps us project what the US economy is going to look like and how it's going to evolve. one thing is super interesting is, during the pandemic, retirement Dynamics changed very significantly and a lot of people opted for retirement earlier than they might have, and that was a bit disruptive. so we were, we were wondering whether labor Supply was never, ever going to come back, because we were going to, we've lost all these people in they. they wouldn't come back. so, um, so I think about it in that context. I also think about it and I would say, just on that point, um, retirement is seems to have s of gone, is reverted closer back to some of its more normal Dynamics, which is, which is good, good to see. yeah, it's, it's very interesting, like it is very interesting because you, we ask a question, a lot sort of what from the pandemic is going to endure, right, so is the work from home going to endure? or is one person, one worker, family is going to endure, because a lot of folks realize that the second uh earner was just covering child care and like. so there are lots of things, uh, supply chain, uh Dynamics and that stuff. so that's one thing of of retirement. a second thing about retirement that I think about is, and is really relevant for this audience, is: um, to what extent are people ready to retire and able to retire in a way so they'll have a a reasonable quality of life. uh, and and there's huge variation in this, uh, and you know, I was actually talking with some of my staff today, some of my I I meet staff on their very first dat and one question today was: like, what about retiring? I was like your earliest money you put in retirement is the most important money. so don't don't like I. I was taught that many, many years ago and I've lived by that. uh, and it is proven to be quite good. but there are lots of folks who don't have that kind of understanding or haven't heard those nuggets and it's. it's going to be very important for us to make sure that as many people as possible understand those things. cuz, working into your late 70s, that's not a happy Prospect, right, and to the extent that we can reduce the number of people who see that as their only option, that's a good thing. yeah, I agree, I think, as, As Americans, we often have a lot of identity wrapped up in our working lives, but that that's a whole different thing than not being able to retire when you want to. or maybe I read right about people who are forced into retirement. it's, it's a very common thing, whether due to a health issue or maybe other things. so you, whatever we can do to get people started early, I think is one of the main levers, very, very important. I agree, yeah, have you. you know, I know you've got a long Runway left in your career, but whenever you think about your own retirement, do you do you think you'll be the kind of person to kick your feet up, or will you continue to research and write papers or what do you think? well, I won't do either of those. so, uh, you know I'm, I'm not a good just kick your feet up and sit or sit on a rocking chair, front porch type of guy, like even for vacations. I need to like be activating my brain and sort of doing things. and so in retirement I imagine that I'll continue to do that. writing papers, those are longer, there's a longer Arc, experiences and Technologies changed and I I can't run statistical packages the way I used to and all those sort of things. so I might, I might advise people on the papers they're working on. I can't imagine I'll be a co-author or any of that sort of stuff, um, but but what I will do eventually I don't really know, and you know, unfortunately enough, I have a job I enjoy, so I'm going to keep doing that, and then we'll sort of see where, uh, opportunities arise. you know, as I've I, I say all the time, the last three jobs I had were not on my list 18 months before I was in them. y, so I don't even know where opportunity might come from, and I'm going to try to stay open to that. the one thing I am very much looking forward to in retirement, though, is discretion. sure, right, so if it's Wednesday and I don't feel like going going into a meeting, I'm just going to call somebody. nope, you're going to have to go without me. um, I'll get the work done, like, if I agree to do work, but having some ability to just sort of U manage the EB and flow of a week or a month or a day, like that's very exciting, because I don't have that today. so, so you know, my day is determined by a whole host of other people. um, which is fine, y, but, uh, but it' be nice to have a change at some point. yeah, I, I appreciate that. I. I get the opportunity to ask many different people that question. I'm always- it's always very interesting to hear how people respond. many, many respond as, as you do it, it's about keeping an open mind and and sort of just staying, you know, busy, staying committed to the things we enjoy doing. I think that's the, the key to a happy retirement as, as well as Financial stability, it's ke to a happy life. you spend your act, your intent and you have intentionality on spending time doing the things you like. I, I tell uh the young people at my bank, if you work in your passion spaces and if you spend time in your passion spaces, you're you, the time goes easy, you're more productive, uh, and you're happier right and and so know what you like, know who you are, and then find things in that space to um, to build a career, and and things usually go quite well. y yep, agreed, um rapael, I thought I'd maybe leave you with a similar question to what George did on stage and and that's: you know, as you think about the, the general public, even the, the professional adviser Community, you know what? what's one or two things you you wish they knew and understood about the FED? I, I, I loved some of the points you made on stage. maybe you could share. yeah, I'll say a couple of things on this. so one is that, um, we really do think hard and we're very analytical. I think on stage I said we are not idiots, right, and so we're not like we, we do have a lot of information and we try what we can um in in a well, that's Dynamic. so these are hard things and precise projections are not easy to develop and there's always a confidence interval. so you know, we're trying our best. second one, um, that comes to mind is: like we're actually regular people, right? so I go to the grocery store like everybody else, I buy gas like everyone else, I go to the movies like everyone else, um, I get on a plane or a train, um, and so the economy and these things are not an abstraction. like there are things that we actually live and have, um, um, an appreciation for, uh, and that's really an important Dynamic. I think folks often have a view that you know, we just sit up in the tower and you know things are brought to us and it's Al, it's funny. so you, we were talking about, he's the interest rate guy at the grocery store. people see me at a restaurant and they're shocked. they're like, oh my God, that's. you're at a restaurant I like. well, I have to eat like everybody else, right, so there. so there is that, which I think is, uh, is actually quite interesting. um, and then the third thing I would say is people are not aware about all the ways that the FED is in communities and affecting day-to-day life. um, think, making credit card transactions work, all those things exactly Mak our economic life, payment settlement and clearing cash wire transfers- um, like these are things that touch every American every day and they have no idea. and on some level, that's a great thing, because that means the infrastructure is working. people don't worry about it and they just worry about what they're doing and not how they're doing it. because once you start worrying about the how, then you might say, ah, I'm not going to do this with to $100,000 or $5,000, or you might say I'll do, I'll do two, but I won't do the five, and then you wind up with less, and that's not good. so those would be some things. well, it's, it's great Insight. I I think you said the point on stage. you know that we're all participants in the economy. you know we, we are the ones driving. you know what interest rates are, what inflation is. it's not some abstract, disconnected thing. it's a reflection of of all of our decisions every day. yeah, that's exactly right. so so, and all the listeners, you're part of the economy as well. you are active participants in this thing. one of the things I do when I um, when I, when I give talks, is I like to pull the audience. so so, during um, during the, during the, the depths of the pandemic, when everyone like the recession is coming, the recession is coming, I used to always ask people how many people, by show of hands, if there was one new worker available, would hire that worker? and everyone's hands went up. and then I would ask: how many people are thinking about laying someone off, like tomorrow? and no hands would go up and I would say: did everyone just see the room? right, the room tells us all we need to know, because that's not what you would expect in a recessionary environment. so it's like like, pay attention and take on board what you know and what you're seeing. that's real information that can really inform how you approach your business, your family, your your life. y? yeah, well, rapael, it's been a great conversation. I could go for hours, but I want to be respectful of your time and I know you've been, you know, speaking to a lot of people today and you made a great presentation, so just really want to say thank you very much for the time and I want to say another, uh, personal thank you to the American College of financial services for inviting me to this fantastic event number one, but also for for making this conversation possible. it's it's really, it's really an honor. so, thank you, Rafael. well, thank you, I really really enjoy the conversation and, uh, look forward to seeing to doing it again sometime. great, awesome. that's all for now, which you can find all our episodes on YouTube, Apple podcasts, Spotify and most other streaming services. be sure to like us, follow us and leave us a rating and review. shares is a production of the American College of financial services, and we hope you join us next time as we share ideas that expand your opportunities.



