https://www.youtube.com/live/NwzEwML9mLk

2024 FMC: Keynote Session with Fed Presidents

Raphael Bostic

2024 Financial Markets Conference

May 21, 2024


[Music]. [Music]. all right, uh, good evening everyone. good evening everyone. good evening. well, table two has it so. good evening everyone. it's good to see you all. I hope you, uh have enjoyed the conference today and had a nice time at the reception. I I just have to say for myself this has been such a wonderful couple of days. the sessions have been outstanding, the company has been great, the convers ation between sessions has continued. a lot of the, the, the, the issues and the ideas that have come up through the conversation and discussions, and it's really got me to think about, you know, a lot of things moving forward and, uh, I'll take I have a lot of takeaways, so I'm looking forward to this. I also wanted to extend my congratulations to Larry wall. he has been an important person for [Applause] us. this conference wouldn't be what it is is without Larry. so thank you for for all your hard work, your commitment to, to making this a great thing. um, I have the great privilege of being, uh the moderator for a closing conversation with two people who I greatly admire and really enjoy being a colleague with. so the first is, uh, Loretta Meer, and Loretta has served as the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland since 2014. she began her fed career as an economist of the Philly fed in 1985, Rose, to be the research director there, one of the real leaders as a female Economist in the Federal Reserve System. uh, before being appointed to head the Cleveland fed, uh, she earned her Bachelor's in math and econ from Barnard College in Columbia and her Masters and PhD in economics from Princeton, where she was a National Science Foundation fellow. welcome, Loretta me, thank you. and we're also joined by: uh, Susan Collins. and Susan has been president and CEO of the fair Reserve Bank of Boston since July of 2022. uh, she's an international Economist with a lifelong interest in policy and its impact on living standards, and she's like Ed Ed glacer- last night, both of these ladies published 40 times more than I am- like these are. these are really just amazing Scholars, uh and uh Susan has been. she's basically held every leadership position you could possibly imagine: she's been Provost, she's been Dean, she's been Professor, research scholar board member at universities and at organizations including the University of Michigan, Brookings, Georgetown and Harvard. she earned her Mi, her PhD and econ at MIT and her undergraduate degree at Harvard. please join me in welcoming Susan Collins. thank you. now we have some questions we have to go through, uh, but I, I like you know, when I moderate these sort of discussions or situations, there's a phrase we we have that's called Atlanta style, right? so we, we like to have our sessions go uh a particular way, and so we usually start our meetings with something called a check-in question. today's check-in question is going to be like: tell me an interesting fact about yourself, or share an interesting fact about yourself that you don't think people would otherwise know, and I'll give you some time, um to reflect on that um, and I'll go first. so, uh, so for me, um, in a previous life I was a radio DJ and I did, uh R&B music, and I also was a sports reporter on the on the air uh for Harvard. so it was hard Sports times most of the time, but but it was fun to to really do that. and um, uh, if you ever get the chance you get to watch me watch, watch a footb game or basketball game, you'll see what I did on the radio. so, so, so, that'll be very good. uh, Loretta, what do you got for us? that's too hard to top. um, an interesting fact about me is: there is actually not one interesting fact about my life that people don't know. o, I beg to dier. okay, you going, let me get away with that. no, we're not going to let you get away with that. so, so we, so we do this with. so, Andre and I, Andre Anderson, our first vice president, and I, we meet every employee on their first date and we ask them this question, and so they have to. we ask them: where, where'd you grow up? and what interesting fact? don't give us a bio, don't give us all that kind of stuff. and we have a bar, a minimum bar that you have to have to exceed in order for the fact. I knew you had a bar. it's right out there. so here we go. okay, all right. so, uh, I love the Opera and I plan to travel and go to the Opera in my time off. do you have a favorite Opera? I do not have a favorite Opera, I love all Opera. okay, we'll just leave it at that. so all right. so, Susan, what do you what? what would you offer up for that? okay, but I have to start by saying you described this as a situation. I didn't realize what I we were getting ourselves into here, but so it. it, in case you maybe hadn't been able to tell just by listening to me, I actually started life with a Scottish accent because I was born in Edinburgh. can you, can you slip into the Scottish brogue or something I I don't, I can't do. I don't do accents, I can't do either Jamaican or Scottish, unfortunately. and you can guess what kind of act. I don't know how to describe my current accent. it just is what it is, but it is a true fact. so well, very good, I think we're checked in, so that. so that that's very good, all right. so every interview I've ever done, afterwards the reporter says it would be, uh, journalistic malpractice if I didn't ask you about what you think is coming with the economy, like, what's your Viewpoint of the economy, no matter what the topic is. so I want to start with that conversation and I'll I'll offer up my view first. um, so you know this economy has been incredibly resilient, uh, stronger than I expected, and, um, I've been really pleased by how fast inflation has come down in spite of that. I want to talk more about that, but I, if I'd love to get your thoughts and additions and how you see things, and, Letta, you want to go first. I mean, I agree with that. I mean that's been the remarkable kind of Journey we've been on here. I think in the F first part of the year the economy was more resilient than we thought and remember last year my forecast was that we'd probably see growth this year below Trend. now I think it'll be above Trend. um, the inflation data we got in the first quarter were disappointing. um, I never expected really inflation to be able to disinflate as quickly as we saw in the second half of last year this year. but I was disappointed that we didn't have progress of the first quarter. we did get a welcome CPI report, but I think it's a little too soon to determine where inflation necessarily is going. base case: I do think we're going to have inflation come down, but I think it's going to take longer than I originally thought it would. yeah, I would actually agree with uh with both of of those comments. I think what? what I would add is just the, the uh elevated degree of uncertainty which continues to be a real feature of the economy, both in in terms of the- you know- monthly data and so you know to to Loretta's Point: um, you know, really not overreacting to any one uh set of uh of readings is important, but also in terms of some of the behavioral relationships. so, you know, I continue to call myself a realistic Optimist- that's been true for a while. realistic: there are risks, there are those uncertainties, but I really am optimistic that, although I think it'll take longer, that we will bring inflation down with a the labor market staying healthy. I want to talk about the labor market in a second, but just given that Outlook, like, what are you thinking about what an appropriate policy stance should look like? and Susan, we'll just uh start with you. yeah, sure, so. so to me that actually um links directly with, I think this is a, a moment when, uh, or a period when patience really matters. um, I think the data have been very mixed and so, being quite patient, I think it's going to take longer uh than I had previously thought. and and uh, that second, something that Loretta just said. but I think that it's important to look really holistically at the information and the data, because they're quite mixed. um and uh. the uncertainty that I mentioned before, I think, is a key factor as well. I think we're well positioned um and I, you know, I think policy's restrictive and we're seeing moderately so perhaps, and we are seeing the economy coming into better balance, um, and I think that's both on the supply side and on the demand side. I think that's what we need to see, but it's going to take longer, um, for us to see the extent of progress that I think is going to be necessary to change our policy stance. I mean, I agree with that. I think this is all about risk management, appropriate risk management. now, and if you think about what's happened over the first part of this year, you know the risks that we're too restrictive and that we're going to have something you know, go AR, right on the employment part of the Mandate have gone down because we saw stronger data than we expected. and then the inflation: you know data said okay, well, maybe inflation is going to hang up a little bit more, so that suggests that, okay, we're going to have to keep rates, you know, restrictive, and I do think they are restrictive right now, um for longer than we thought. but the, you know, because the real side of the economy has been as resilient as has, we're not really not taking that big of a risk of keeping in keeping our interest rate where it is for longer until we gather that information about what? what is that path of inflation? you know, I think it's too soon to determine that, oh no, it's all stalled out and we're not going to get dis inflation. but I also think that we have an opportunity here, given the well positioning of monetary policy, to actually gather that data and to get more confidence that inflation is on that sustainable time of half back to 2%. so I think we're well positioned and I think it's going to be risk management and making sure that we keep monetary policy well positioned as we go forward through this until we get back to price stability. so I I basically agree with both of you. I I wanted to sort of push on a little further about how we think about well positioned as we move through the rest of this year. so you know, one of the things that we've heard when we talk, when when our team talks to Business Leaders, is that, um, there's a lot of C capital on the sidelines. people are really sensitive about the possibility of being able to time their re-entry into the marketplace to try to take advantage of, uh, declining interest rates, um, so that they can have a little cost benefit on this. um, are you hearing the same things and and and. does that give you pause in terms of what a trajectory of policy should look like, moving forward? so I'm not hearing that. what I am hearing is that, um, you know, going into the last of homec meeting, a lot of the people we talked to- we talked to a lot of people over the district- were like, wow, things were actually a little bit better than I thought they would be this year. but they're still sort of being a little cautious about, you know, not overspending, not over hiring- it's gotten easier to hire now. um, so I think they're still they're optimistic that things actually are turning out a bit stronger than they thought, but I haven't heard that they're all poised to jump in, um, as soon as, maybe, we make an interest rate cut. I do think, though, you know, like, if you think about like, policy has to be forward-looking. you know we wouldn't want to keep interest rates where they are now until inflation gets down to 2%. so at some point, if inflation and inflation expectations continue to move down, you would want to bring your policy rate down to avoid an inadvertent tightening of policy. right, because you think about the real rate. so that's going to happen at some point. but right now I we need to just be a little bit, as as Susan said, patient on this and gather more data so there's more clarity around what that inflation path looks like and we're not taking a big risk by doing that, because so far the labor market remains very healthy. now I certainly think we have to balance the risk. we've got to be very attented to what's happening on the real side of the economy in terms of growth and the labor market when we're doing this. but I think that's sort of the the, the job going forward is to do that evaluation and balance those risks. yeah, so I I'm hearing cautious optimism as well, and again there's some difference across sectors and there's some unevenness. so so I'm hearing that there are uh, pretty widespread uh, it's easier to hire, that firms are not feeling like they need to raise wages at the same degree that they might have some time ago. um, that speaks to things coming into better balance and into, um you know, uh, some uh adjustment that will reduce some of the pressures that I think we saw perhaps in the first half of, uh, the first quarter of this year. but again, um, I think it's quite mixed. I think different sectors are seeing different things, and I think that there's uncertainty in terms of what kind of uh pricing decisions uh might make sense going forward. so this is really a time to be patient, recognizing that, um, you know, we are well positioned and I agree with Loretta from that standpoint as well. so I'm going to want to ask a question about the labor markets in a second, but I did want to remind you because I forgot to do this last time. if you have questions, uh, use the app facility and I'm getting them here on the iPad. we will definitely leave time for that as we move forward. I want to just talk briefly about the labor market. so you know, pandemic happens. we lose 20 million, 22 million jobs. uh, they come back much faster than anyone had expected. um, we start hearing about Labor shortages. we, we get this imbalance in the supply side. today, we see job growth is robust, even with the last reading at 175,000, the average is far above population replacement and wage growth is pretty strong, right, how do you think about this? uh, and I didn't even mention immigration, which is an additional addition to this- like, how do you think this jives with the notion that we're in a restrictive stance like: do you expect that labor markets are going to continue to be growing this briskly, um, or do you think that there's a sort of an end point that's going to come in the next year or so? so so let me jump in on that one. I totally agree that the Dynamics we've seen in labor markets are unusual, really interesting, and also have lots of Dynamics to them. so I think the strength of what we've seen in labor markets has both factors that are on the supply side and also on the demand side. on the demand side, the, the real strength in household balance sheets, has led to the strength in demand and consumption, and we've seen that and that's helped to, um, create demand across a pretty broad set of sectors for additional workers. and then, on the supply side, it's not just the immigration that you mentioned, but it's also the increase in labor force participation, and one of the things I've been really struck by is the extent to which that has really been concentrated among women, um, despite the fact that the dependent care challenges have still been- uh, you know, continue to be- uh, really challenging, and the extent of Labor productivity increases which we've seen, and, of course, time will tell the extent to which the increases we'll seen will continue, how much of it's a level increase or not? but uh, and how much of it is is ongoing. but I do think that there's evidence of the restrictiveness of policy showing through in some of the indicators that I mentioned. it's getting easier to higher. turnover is way down, um, some of the wage growth has moderated. so I think the strength comes from multiple factors and the rebalancing that we're seeing shows that there is some restriction in there, um, and so I think strength will continue, but perhaps not at the the kind of payroll growth that we had seen, um, which uh, I I do think uh is likely to moderate, but again overtime. I mean, I agree with that and if you talk to the firms that we talk to, they do say, as Susan said, it's it's become easier to hire than it was a couple of years ago, um, and easier to retrain workers than it was a couple of years ago. if you look at sort of job openings to unemployed, that's basically almost back down to where it was pre pandemic. job openings have come down, the rate of job openings have come down. labor force participation, at least among you know which prime age, which I hate, that, um, I feel like I'm still in my Prime and I'm not in that category. but anyway, um, you know, prime age worker Force par ipation has come down, I come back up, um, so there's a lot of evidence that it is moderating and getting into better balance, as Susan said. but I do think one of the surprises has been the resilience in those numbers, because I was expecting that we would would have seen a bit slower job growth by now. so I think it it underscores what Susan said, which there's things going on the supply side and the demand side, but we have to be a tenant to that as we go forward. that's why I think it's going to be this balancing, to make sure that, you know, we're taking, taking into account what the risk are and keeping policy well positioned so that it can respond no matter how things play out. so we had um a session early in the conference on transmission of monetary policy and there's been, basically for the most part of the better part of this year, a conversation about: does the fed's policy have the same oomph or efficacy that it's always had, or has some something fundamentally changed such that you we might think that is not, not as strong as it was, or maybe there isn't any efficacy at all. what's your take on that like? do you think that our policy still has strength? are you feeling that, um, it's being masked by things like: what's driving the dynamic that we've seen over the last? you know, we've been, we've been at at this level for quite some time now- the better part of a year, uh, and yet there's still a lot of energy in the economy. what, what do you make of that? so, so it seems to me that, uh, so, first of all, we, we can't fully parse out what some of the different Dynamics are, but I'll tell you what my view would be, given the data that we've seen so far, and that is that a number of special factors are really playing a very important role. so, special factors, such as the very strong household balance sheets that we went into this cycle, having, which is unusual compared to other Cycles- strong, firm balance sheets as well, I think those have been playing a significant role. you know, and it's also true if you go back and look at the, you know those long and variable lags, um, estimated on prior Cycles, which, uh, you know they, they have a range of like four to five quarters after coming up to a peak rate for when the the full effects of monetary policy would come through. we've been at the peak. now it's only three quarters and so even from that standpoint- and those prior uh Cycles, with the lags, were not estimated on uh from a period where there had been such a long prior time of low rates. and so I think there are a lot of reasons why special dimensions of this cycle could explain why we're moderately restrictive and we have perhaps still more in the pipeline, although it's possible that there have been some more fundamental changes. I just don't think that we can really tell yet and my null hypothesis would be that the special factors are really playing a significant role. I mean, I think if I look at sort of what's happening in the economy, I think you can see that monetary policy has, you know mo, helped moderate demand. I mean I think you don't. you talk to, you know, businesses. they're saying the same thing. it is harder to you know, buy a house. I mean there's definitely sectors where you can see the effects of monetary policy now. is it as restrictive as one might have thought, given the level of interest rates? I would say probably. not going into this. as I said, I thought that we would have seen more slow down on the real side than we have. but I also think that there's things happening on the on the supply side um, that also have affected things. and you know, in the last summary of economic projections we have to put in a. you know, what do you think the long run um neutral rate is? I raise mine because I think, given the estim estimates that I'm getting out of models on that and also what we've seen in the economy is it could very well be we're, we're less um, we're we're less restricted than perhaps we would have been beforehand, and there are a number of dynamics that go into that rstar calculation. so again, you know, the earlier session today talked about the balance sheet as being one of those factors, perhaps um. but I think again, that's why I think it's really crucial that we stay well positioned and make sure that we're continuing to make progress on the price ility part of the Mandate and trying to keep labor markets healthy. and if we can keep policy well positioned, I think we'll be able to achieve both parts of the Mandate and what the level of interest rates are that achieves that. that's going to be the work going forward to sort of evaluate that when we started the tightening cycle, policy was not well positioned right, inflation had been going up for quite some time and we were still at a zero- essentially zero- interest rate and then we had to move very quickly and and pretty aggressively relative to history. so you know that was uncomfortable for some of the reasons we talked about today in terms of the banking system, you know, would they be able to handle that, um, pace of increase? so that's like to me, a lesson here is that you don't want to get into that situation again and that's why this really evaluating risk and making sure that policy is well positioned to handle the risk, no matter which ones manifest themselves. as Susan said, there's a lot of risk out in the economy. there's a lot of uncertainty. you know there could be risk that we're not even, you know, thinking about. now you've got to be keep yourself well positioned so that you can move either way, and I think policy rates, where they are, allow us to do that. yeah, so when I get this question, I I try to remind folks in many regards I think we're still in a pandemic economy and, um, all the supports that happened. the ability of families to still get income but not be able to spend, uh, has put people in a much stronger position. I also think that the way that inflation spiked and the the forward guidance we gave to say interest rates are not going to stay where they are caused a lot of households to refy and lock in their low rates, caused a lot of businesses to do the same, and so a lot of parties in the economy today are not as interest rate sensitive as they might all otherwise be. actually, we had a conversation with a business leader who said: look, my next invest Investments today are software as a service. I'm not buying a, a, a machine or any of those sorts of things, and that is an expense. that's not credit right, and so I'm not even interest rate sensitive on how I'm going to introduce technology into my business in the same way I was before. I think all of those things are suggestive that it's just going to take a longer time for folks to turn to interest rates as something that's going to drive their decisions in a material way. um, but they know that it's coming like no one I've ever talked to says: well, you don't, I don't think about interest RS ever anymore, and then we don't have to worry about it. it's just that where they are today is not the first line of constraint, uh, but it's going to get there. so, for me, I I really think about this- is about efficacy, letting time pass, letting people work out of those situations and get back into, uh, another one. I think it depends on where, where you are. I think certain sectors are quite interest rate sensitive at the for sure, for sure, you know, I don't, I don't know whether I want to conclude that the world is totally different. the transmission mechanism is totally different. yeah, I, I agree with that. I think you know, um, I think about our policy- Cascades through the economy, right, and it hits the most sensitive sectors first, and then it keeps flowing through, uh, it's, it's that flow through that's going to change. so, you know, we- I'm sure both of you- have had the same thing talking to mortgage, uh, Branch, uh, divisions of banks, they, they say we've been in an session for, you know, a year now, um, and so it really does have that sensitivity. I want to ask a different question about the pandemic, though. um, uh, there is a lot that happened in the pandemic. what do you think is going to be, um, some of the big, important, lasting shifts, uh, that sustain coming out of the, the, the pandemic. so, uh, I, I would, I would point to a couple of things that I think are going to be lasting. one of them has to do with the way we use technology in work, and there are a lot of Dimensions to that. but you know, if you think about it, we had the technology to do a lot of those remote meetings well before the pandemic, but it's hard to imagine something else that would have happened that would have caused this synchronized learning and experimentation, AC across sectors, across geographies, across firms, for figuring out how to actually do this. and you know, I think that that has changed the trajectory of the way certain kinds of Technology are used in work, and I think that's lasting and I think it's still playing out in terms of, um, what the implications of that are. so, again, we had the technology, but I think the pandemic really changed collectively the way we use it. and the other thing I think is is how we think about supply chain. we had a a conversation, uh, yesterday also about the implications of supply chain, many of the changes predated the pandemic, but I think we're often crystallized there. you know everything from the fact that it's now a regular conversation at the fomc tables to look at information about Supply constraints, um, I think, a different understanding of how persistent they can be, but also the interactions with demand shocks, shifts in consumption behavior and supply chain challenges. at the same time that that interaction, I think, has changed both how we think about things as policy makers, how businesses think about things, and I think there's some lasting uh effects uh, there as well. so there are others, but those are two that I would highlight. I mean, those are big ones and I agree with those. definitely. I think there's also sort of a changing uh, maybe it's a preference shock. you know how people think about work, um, and the attachment to the workforce, and maybe there's, you know, balance that came to play and people thinking about differently and that makes it that affects the labor market and how you think about the labor market if you're employer, um, and I don't know how that's going to play out, frankly, I think, but I think that's sort of something that also is sort of um, we got to think about that harder um than before, um, in terms of you know how how much people want to balance work and life, and that feeds into sort of this work from home, which is part of this. the other thing I would say is that I think technological change- I think people saw the benefits of moving faster, um, and being prepared for things that you're not anticipating. so more resiliency, being, you know, faster Innovation, I think, could come out of this as well. so there's some positives here too, and I'll just say on this, I I try to remind people we're employers too, right? so we are in the mix, trying TR to figure out the answers to these things, and it's complicated and you are lots of different preferences that are shifting. that makes it actually quite a challenge, um, but it keeps, keeps our days Lively for sure, um. so I'm going to go to questions now. uh, we have about 15 minutes left. the first question, um, are we learning that lags in monetary policy are longer, or that the neutral rate is higher, or both? and the answer, the add-on, is: what factors would lead to a higher equilibrium rate? so, so why don't I jump in on that one? and you know, I think that it's very hard, um, in real time, to parse out the different possible explanations, or combination of explanations of what we're seeing um. so, as I said before- and uh, Raphael, you actually uh, you know, kind of elaborated on that- the special factors that um characterize the this cycle, um, really, uh, I think do explain some reduced inra Sensitivity. I actually think that that starting to dissipate, but uh, kind of early days and that could look like longer legs, but I see that as special factors. I also think that there could be reasons why the- you know, underlying neutral rate um might be higher, perhaps in the medium run. um, you know, there are a variety of different factors that would lead lead to, uh, you know, the higher productivity that I mentioned would lead to non-inflationary higher growth and that would be associated with the higher uh neutral rate, at least in the in the medium term um higher investment, whether it's for, uh, you know, Greening our economy. uh, there's a variety of different uh things. the, the kind of reshoring we talked about a bit uh last time, could lead to that too. but then those longer term demographic factors are still there, and how those are going to uh offset or not one another, I think it's just really hard to tell um and and that's slow moving. so I think that it's too early to really parse those things out, but, uh, it's something that we need to keep, uh, paying really close attention to. I agree with that. I I think you know there are reasons, factors you can point to. this balance between savings and investment is a driver of what the neutral rate will be in the future. the demographics actually work in two ways. you know the Aging the population. right, we think savings. you know people start spending down, but then also you're living longer and so that means that you may have to work, you know. so there it's very complicated, as you say, to actually come to it, but there are factors you can point to that would suggest the neutral rate may be higher now than it was, um, in in the recent past, and I think that's something to keep in mind, added to the underlying structural changes that are uncertain at this point, that make it a challenge to sort of understand. but remember, the phrase is long and variable lags, so I don't think this is that unusual that you know there isn't one lag that we know. that's the time frame. all right, so we're going to now go into light. uh, a modified lightning round. so poite is telling us to shut up. that's okay, we're too long winded. we, we are doing a modified lightning round. I'm just going to double down on that and, um, so, for each question, just one of you is going to respond. we, we, we actually have a lot, of, a lot of questions. I'm going to try to get through as many as possible and- and this lately on, we would we get one word, two word, three words. what do we get? we don't want to let him constrain us too much, Loretta. so I knew this was going to be a hard panel, tomor, right, right, this is what comes with familiarity and, uh, they give as good as they get. so, um, I, I'll leave you to judge what the appropriate respones. all right, so, um, next question is: we've heard papers on reshuffled Supply chains, on constraints on monetary transmission, calls for more attention to financial stability and the spillover effects of some of these things. um, there's a lot of, Susan you mentioned. there's a lot of both of you mentioned. there's a lot of uncertainty out there. where does this leave? monetary policy is, are, are we in an era where it's it's more likely that there going to be mistakes or that there's going to be this continual scramble to try to stay on top of things like: how do, how do you think about it goe? so, um, you know, I think uncertainty is not new. I do think we are in a period of elevated uncertainty and, um, you know, to me what that says is that we need to look more broadly at the kind of information that we use- the quantitative as well as qualitative- and while we are doing the underlying analyses, trying to potentially model out our star and look at a variety of other factors- that's not really what's determining monetary policy decisions- meeting to meeting in real time. it's about the, the risk management and balance. it's about what we're seeing in the inflation data, what we're seeing in labor market data, what we're seeing more broadly, I mean, I think of there being a constellation of information and we're trying to get that picture, meeting by meeting to see what makes sense. and at the moment, I fully agree, being patient- uh, you know, is is exactly the right policy, because I think that we are in a place where we're well balanced. so that wasn't a lightning response, um, but you didn't interrupt, so I, I, I take it that that was all good. oh, no, scenarios. I my one word: scenarios. I like scenarios, scenario planning. look at different scenarios. there you have it. um, I would say, Susan, your answer here was: I almost felt like you were Clairvoyant, because the very next question on my list says: what's the constell ation of data that you would need to see, need to see to make you confident it is appropriate, the cut rates. but since you started it, we give this to Loretta, okay. well, I need to see a few more months of inflation data that looks like it's coming down. but I also am very attentive to what's going on with inflation expectations. I really believe that we maintained we were able to get the disinflation we have gotten because we did not allow long-term inflation expectations to move up, and I think that was a crucially important component of the disinflation we got. I think last year we got a lot of help on the supply side and one of the reasons I didn't expect that we'd see as much progress this year is because I don't think we're going to get as much help on the supply side because it's things normalize and things come into better balance in the labor market. we can't really expect that, but I do think that's going to be key to for my view of where policies should go. all right, thank you. next question: um, there's been a lot of talk about deg, ating, quality of data, especially in terms of some of the surveys that are done by the federal government. H, how does that? how do you take that on board? how does that impact your thinking about having a data dependent approach to uh deciding monetary policy? so, um, I actually do think that paying careful attention to the data, how it, how it's collected, what, what happens there, is important, and there may be things we can do to improve it. I've long believed- and well before coming in into this position- that when you see something similar, when you look at something in a variety of different ways and it's pointing in the same direction, um, that's more compelling, and so, to me, that really causes me to look more holistically at the range of information, both quantitative, modelbased analysis and qualitative um, and to take the time- which I think we're well positioned to do- to gather more information before making decisions. so so that's where it leads me. that's the methodical, patient, holistic, I mean. the other thing is that we've seen a kind of explosion of new surveys and throughout the Federal Reserve Banks, right, so we're collecting a lot of data. the Cleveland fed collects a lot of data on inflation expectations. Atlanta, you're very well known for the. you know data that you collect and the surveys you do, so there's a. there is a richer data source as well. um, that can point you in the directions, even as sample sides, size or some of the official government statistics go down. so I don't. I think we have a lot of data that we look at all the time and that the consistency of looking at the same data you get a sense of where the econom is going. I, I and I would just say on this- and both of your answers I totally agree with- we all have realized that just relying on the set sources of data that we had from the federal government was not giving us a complete, realtime picture of where the economy is, and we've all needed to supplement. so our bank, we have a, a survey Center, we run out a bunch of surveys, we have staff that go and just talk to people. we try to talk to anywhere from 60 to 100 Business Leaders in the fomc cycle to make sure that we're getting on the Ground Intelligence in real time on this and, uh, it's been super helpful, I have to say, for me, it, it, it comes in and it winds up being new information. uh, that gives a richer perspective on where the economy is is and a lot of that data that you're getting when you go. we have, like, I think, eight advisory councils that are across the district, um, and then a couple other advisory councils that we have on the energy sector. what you get is more forward-looking information than some of the statistics. so the statistics are very good about telling you kind of where you are, where you've been, where you are maybe, but the what you get when you actually do this sort of evalu- you know, Gathering across a reconnaissance across the district- is you really get information on things that you need to keep an eye on because of where things are going, and I think that's been very helpful. you do have to read through because it's anecdotal, so it's a little bit different than what you can do with you know the hard statistical data, but it does give you a rich sense of, kind of maybe, where things are headed and where the risk are going forward, and that's what I think's been very helpful in this kind of Uncertain environment of a pandemic, where you know when I think people forget at the start of the pandemic how really really uncertain things were and some of the the dire, yes, um, you know scenarios that could have occurred, and I it, you know it's. it's good to think back to that time when things were really really um, you know, when we were washing our mail. I mean I'm glad we not in that time, glad we're not there, glad we're not there, but just really wanted to Second the importance of some of that qualitative and often forward-looking information. I, I totally agree with that. all right, so, um, before I wrap up, I want to do one last question for both of you- and it really is sort of a step back- about sort of where you are today and, uh, to give, I want to give each of you an opportunity to reflect on what your, what Your fed experience has been, um, and and how you've experienced it. so, Susan, um, you've been here, uh, you're Rel, you're a relative newbie, uh, and um, you've been here about two years and I'm, I'm seven, going on seven, and I feel like a newes. so so there's there, there's that like, can you talk a little bit about what surprised you about heading a Reserve Bank and serving on the fomc? look how's it been, yeah, so so I have to say you learn a ton every day, work with really committed, really uh uh, experts in a range of different fields, and so you know, I walk in every day knowing I'm going to learn a lot and that's pretty wonderful. the some of the surprises we've been talking about: this has been a really unusual time time for the economy and, uh, trying to understand what data to look at, what to pull together, how to understand. I mean that there have been certainly surprises along the way and I expect that those will continue. I I do have to say I thought a lot about monetary policy before actually taking this role. it's not the same as actually being in the seat and thinking through how are you going to make this decision for sure, yeah, so if you would, you know so, and that's still true, right? um, you know the importance of the work that we do and the commitment and you can feel that around the fomc table. that's not really a surprise, but it is something that, uh, I take really seriously. and just the one other thing I would say, because I knew quite a bit about the Federal Reserve, but I didn't really understand the breadth of the portfolio of work that the Federal Reserve does to really support a vibrant economy, and I I like to say that for the Boston fed our, our overarching mission is a vibrant economy that works for everyone, not just for some people. and the the range of ways that we, through our research, through our community and economic development, through our engagement across the first district, the range of ways that we really are committed to doing that, often in collaboration, I think is not well known and was also surprised to me, even though I had known quite a bit when I came in, and I think it really matters. well, I totally agree with that. um, our tagline is an economy that works for everyone. so we're we're Kindred Spirits on that journey, and it's really always in spiration to see the ways that we can make a difference. so so, Loretta, for you now, you've been in the FED system for nearly 40 years. like you're, no one's going to call that a newbie. I think in our bank, though, you would rank maybe 30 or 40 in terms of like, like tenure. we we have lots of long tenur people. um. so can you talk about? um, first, are you still learning day-to- day? and then, second, how, how would you describe the evolution of the Federal Reserve and how it's changed over your career and what things stand out to you about, sort of where we are today as opposed to where we are when you started. I mean, I learn every day. I hope I learn every day. gosh, it'd be kind of bad if I weren't. um, there's a lot to learn and I I just want to feel I feel like I've been privileged to have my career in the FED, like it's not something I necessarily planned. you know, um, and I didn't expect to stay as long as I did. but you know, you come in and you're an economist and you're doing research and it's exciting and you get to learn from a lot of really smart people, which I think is great, and then you take on more responsibility. I think the thing that's i, instead of saying what's changed, I I'd like to focus on what's the same: the importance of the work of the fed and the Missi driven people that are in the fed and the importance of the institution. so you know, in my bank I always say it's the people make up the institution, but the institution itself is important and doing all we can to make sure that it stays a really healthy, vibrant institution, because the mission is so important and in my years there- and it's been a long time and I've been in two Reserve Banks and I visited the Board of Governors to a one- everyone is really focused on the mission of the fed and making sure that they're doing the best work they can because they feel the mission is very important. whether it's monetary policy or the other things that we do as federal reserve banks, whether it's the payments you know work that we do, whether it's the treasury work right that Kathy helps the system do. there's a lot of work that goes on the FED, but everybody that I've ever run into is really focus on trying to do the best work they can. and I don't know whether there are that many institutions that could say that, but I've seen it firsthand and you know you go to the fomc meetings and I've been. I've been. I started going when, when we had um, Allen greens fan was chair. you know then, Ben and Janet and and J pal and to A1 that all have very different styles, um, and that's a good dinner conversation to sort of talk about Styles. but to all, to all, everyone was really focused on setting monetary policy to really really really achieve a healthy economy, price stability, maintain price stability, and so I think that's something that I take away from the fed. well, I will Echo that 100%. I tell people all the time that's the best job I've ever had, and it's because of what you were just talking about. the collection of people that work on on this are just incredible, and I would count both of you among them. like you have helped make my experience tremendously Rich. you've helped our institution be a great one, and I just want to thank you for all your contributions that you've made and all that you will continue to make moving forward. it's been such a privilege for me to share a stage with Loretta and Susan. I've really enjoyed the conversation and, uh, please thank them for for un. all right, I think we're done, so, uh, please enjoy your dinner and uh, enjoy each other's company. it's been great to have you all. thank you, n.


