https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t65dei4_BTY

Fireside Chat at the University of Miami Herbert Business School

Raphael Bostic

the University of Miami Herbert Business School

Apr 18, 2024

[Music]. I don't know if anybody saw on 60 Minutes 3. four weeks ago they did a story on Jerome Powell, but they had a shot of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting and who was right there in the middle of the picture? but my longtime friend in colle colleague, Rafael bask, who is the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and has been in that role since 2017. before that, he worked in DC and was the designer of one of the most effective Home Mortgage adjustment programs that got us through the great financial crisis. he's been an academic at the University of Southern California, so he has the academics view of the world and we're really lucky to have him here. we've been trying forever to get him down here and we just had a Confluence of events that made it work. so let me introduce rapael [Applause] bastic. so we are whoops on. is it on? y perfect um. we working with these mics because this is being live streamed for all I know, around the world, but definitely around the country, and we want to make sure that we get nice sound quality for that. we will chat with some pre-arranged questions for a while and then at the end, we will leave time for questions from the audience. so my first question has to do with the beige book, because timing is excellent that the beige book came out yesterday afternoon and, for those of you that don't know, every Federal Reserve Bank prepares an economic overview of their region and for us that comes from Georgia all the way down here to Florida, and it's very carefully done, in kind of an interesting way, and it provides really good realtime information. so my first question is what you found revealing in the beige book yesterday and how you see conditions being different here in South Florida versus, maybe, the rest of your District. sure, well, thank you very much. first of all, good evening everyone. so I know the, the, the professor, trained you already, so that's why I wanted to go there, so that that's good. um, uh, just want to say how excited and thrilled I am to be here in Miami, um, to talk about the economy and real estate. I actually hadn't done read my briefing so I didn't know this was a real estate challenge. uh, congratulations to all the participants that. uh, at USC we do a real estate Challenge and I was, uh, the, the program director, so I've been at one a lot of these evenings where we are all wondering what the judges have done and then then we'll go out afterwards and argue about it. so, so it's great. I'd also say that you know, Kevin, I think you talked about evicted the book. um, many years ago, I guess maybe eight, nine years ago- I did a podcast, uh, a book. I had a book CLP podcast, and we did evict it as one of our conversations. it's. it's actually quite. the book is quite thought-provoking on how real estate markets function and operate and how people live in that space, as they're on the edges of precariousness, uh, and so it. it really it was very thought-provoking for me and, uh, the conversation was actually quite interesting. so I would encourage all you to get the book but also listen to our podcast because, um, uh, you can get a lot of different insights. now you asked about the beige book and, um, you know, the one of the things that we in Atlanta have really invested a lot in is trying to get realtime information. so everyone knows the government issues data on unemployment rates and inflation and GDP and capacity utilization, all those sort of things. but one of the things that I've learned, um, and become much more sensitive to, is the fact that that information is all backward looking, is telling about things that happened last month or last quarter. uh, and in today's world that is changing so rapidly and so consistently, um sometimes times that information is not going to be helpful for giving me a sense of what's going to happen moving forward. and so we've built a whole apparatus, what we call the regional economic Information Network, uh, which is basically a team of people whose job it is to go and talk to people and talk to Business Leaders, Community leaders, in, uh, unstructured conversations somewhere between 60 and 90 minutes to just ask, like, what are you seeing today, what are your stresses, what are your challenges, what, what, what things you expecting will happen in the next 3 months and the next six months? uh and th. that kind of intelligence gives us a supplemental piece of information above and beyond the, the aggregate statistics and ways that are actually quite helpful and in today's environment, in the last several years, um have been incredibly important because, as you recall, through covid um, we learned new things weekly. like the world was changing on on such a regular basis that the backward data, even two weeks ago, sometimes wasn't actually useful, so we needed to be continually doing that. so, over an fomc cycle, a Federal Open Market Committee, that's the interest rate setting body, um, we'll get somewhere between 60 and 100 of these interviews, uh, and a lot of times those interviews themselves will tell a narrative about how the economy is working that is distinct from what you might see in the aggregate data. so what is what is our, our, our beebook entry? um, really said that the economy is slowing down, uh, but it's slowing down slowly, though the pace of of change is slow, uh and uh. at the same time, we've heard from businesses that, uh, their, their pricing power, their ability to pass through increases in cost, has weakened considerably relative to where it was last year or the years before. to me, that that's good news, because that really speaks to, uh, the reality that what we're hearing is consistent with what my outlook for the economy is, which is continued slowing down. you know, inflation was super high, uh, it has come down quite a bit, but it is not at our Target right now, uh, and so there's still a ways to go, and, uh, we just need to make sure that that is continuing as we move forward. other thing I would just say, and just to get this out of the way, like I, we've made great progress and the economy is doing quite well today, right, it's creating lots of jobs. last reading was 300,000 or so jobs in a month. that's a large l number. wage growth is happening and it's faster than the rate of inflation. so workers are making progress against sort of how the econom is evolving and inflation is continuing to move, come down and, if you think about our mandates, stable prices, so that's inflation getting at a Target. it's also maximum employment to make sure that the economy is continuing to grow and create opportunities. we're doing well on the maximum employment basis and we've got progress that we're seeing in the inflation space. uh, and that's that's. those are. those are good news stories. that's good to hear. do you have anything to talk about specifically South Florida, what you're seeing there versus the rest of the southeast, sure? so, um, you know my district is extremely diverse. so I have the full State of Florida, the full state of Georgia, the full state of Alabama, I have the bottom half of Mississippi, the bottom half of Louisiana and the Eastern 2/3 of Tennessee, right, so that's a lot. I got Appalachian, I got Gulf Coast, I have military, I got Tech, I got entertainment. it's all there, right. and so when I come down here. you know this is a unique place. it is a gateway to a lot of South and Central American money. uh, it is a, a hub that attracts a lot of hospitality and Leisure activity. Everyone likes the vacation done here in Miami, right, uh, and so, um, those sectors wind up being outsized and and the so and and very unique and distinctive. so this, this Market, is strong, uh and um, even in the in the Florida Space, Miami itself is kind of distinct. you know, we, we track a lot of information about real estate markets. so, uh, uh, home housing, affordability, pricing, all those sorts of things, and the strength that you see in this market is actually stronger in some sectors. so, uh, I see a look at a lot of markets, uh, commercial markets, office markets, um, they're not, I would not say they're super strong here, but they're stronger than what you are seeing in other places, and that's actually quite interesting. uh, and then the strength in Hospitality, the, the continued demand from consumers to want to go on vacation, to, to spend and do those things, has meant that the pricing pressure in this market is stronger than what we see in other places. uh, and I think you, I was talking to some people earlier today and they were noting that in this market, the, the levels of inflation are higher than they are in other parts of the country, uh, but they are also coming down, so they're not as high as they were a year ago, uh, and that's a positive thing and that's something we'll have to remember. yeah, that's definitely something we'll have to remember. I know that everybody here is dying to ask the next question I'm about to ask. we all you would like to hear your thoughts about interest rates hopefully dropping eventually, but also, Raphael has a a very specific view about the anticipation of those rates dropping. that I don't know. that everybody has considered. yeah, so I'll say two things on this. so one, you know I purposfully didn't talk about interest rates to start because I wanted to make sure everyone stayed in the room for the whole fireside chat. um, look, we are on our path to our inflation Target and you know, over like when, when inflation got high, we as a body increase interest rates to a level that I think is currently restrictive and it will eventually slow things down, um, but it's. the question is really at what pace? and I would say that, um, I'm expecting that pace to be slow, uh, and I expect the progression of inflation to our 2% Target to be somewhat bumpy, and so, um, my outlook for the economy is uh, for our policy is uh. well, let me tell: my outlook for the economy is slow, steady growth, that continue to slow. I do not have a recession in my Outlook, uh, but that slowness means means that we won't. I don't think it'll be appropriate to drop rates soon, because if we drop rates, there is a possibility that there's excess energy in the economy that puts upward pressure on prices and moves us even further from our Target. so I'm willing to be patient. I'm not in a a hurry to to get our inflation to 2%, as long as it's moving there, while we're seeing job growth and output growth- right, because we have the Dual mandate. if we're doing well on one and the others moving to in the direction we want to go, then I'm fine standing there. so I see one cut for this year. that's, that's my Outlook, uh and um, it'll be toward the end of the year because, as you've seen in recent months, inflation is not moving as strongly to our 2% Target as it was toward the end of last year. so I'm willing to be patient on that. one thing I would Su just emphasize, though, is that- and I talked about this a bit with our our rain Network- the world is changing fast and unexpected things have been happening on a regular basis. so even though I have an Outlook, I have to be prepared for the possibility that the world of alls in ways that aren't like my Outlook, and if it does do that, then I'm going to have to change sort of my view of what appropriate policy is. so my two words: um, for the economy. one is grateful, I'm grateful for all the progress we've made on inflation. I'm grateful that the economy has continued to grow and have uh significant uh employment growth. um, but I'm Vigilant as well, because the unexpected can happen and when it does, we need to notice that on time so that our policy can adjust on time to keep the economy moving the way we need it to. thank you, um, just you talking about behavioral change. you have the, the big picture. what would you say are the maybe three to five most important behavioral changes that you've seen since the pandemic that will impact the either as or the economy? you know, what are you watching? um, yeah, so that's a very interesting question, and that came from someone in our audience. well, here's the thing, uh, through the pandemic. so so my, my group- we have 1,800 people. I think some PE times people forget that we're an employer as well, uh, and that that there are the Dynamics in the workplace. like, I have to wrestle with that, me and my leadership team, to make sure we can continue to do all the things that we need to do. um, clearly there have been some significant changes in labor markets. like workers, through the pandemic, they were sitting at home doing their work. for many, many of them, and even the central workers who were out there, they started being much more aware of where alternative job options were right. and so, um, you know, when Amazon and Walmart and Target and others announc broadly that their entry level pay is now going to be $20 an hour, $23 an hour, $25 an hour, um, I think that kind of awareness changed how a bunch of workers view their, their univers, their opportunity set to say, okay, I could either work for minimum wage or I can try to get a job at the Fulfillment center. and it's really changed the, the, the competitive Dynamic for workers. and we saw through the pandemic that wage growth for lower wage jobs grew faster or was higher than it was for other jobs at other parts of the distribution. that's quite unusual. that's not what you usually see in economic disruption. usually the pain is at the low. the biggest pain is at the lowest end. that didn't happen in the pandemic and I think in part it was because of, well, one, they were essential workers, but, two, the workers understood that they had better opportunities than they might have otherwise. you second thing is something that you know everyone has dealt with, which is, uh, the location of work has changed. workers actually want to work differently spatially than they have before. so, whether it be work from home, 100% of the time, 80% of the time, 60% of the time, it's meant that, um, that we all have to think differently about space and sort of how, how we want to do what we want to do and where we want to do. it has huge implications for real estate and is one of the reasons why, in a lot of conversations, there been a lot of concerns raised about the viability of a lot of office space, because the workers realized that they actually had an office in their house and sometimes it's nice to not have to get all cleaned up and you know, you can wear shorts and on the zoom call and all that kind of stuff, uh, and you can still get your work done. and that realization is, I think, is going to uh be something that we're not going to go all the way back to 5 days a week in the office. I just don't. I I think that workers are valuing that flexibility in an interesting way, uh. and then a third thing I would just offer is, um, and we're in a business school here, so, uh, business strategies, so preco, uh, many Business Schools, I think pretty much all of them. we're teaching, uh, that the goal in production is to find your lowest cost provider of an input and then use that exclusively. like you're, we're working towards cost minimization, and what Co actually revealed was that if you do that, you have different kinds of vulnerabilities. and if so, because if something happens in that location now, you can't produce at all, and so there's value in having a more Diversified input sector and input strategy. uh, and that diversification necessarily would mean it's not going to be lowest cost, right, if you've already found lowest cost, if you go somewhere else, that, by definition, if you've done your job well, will be higher than what you were paying this other place. but it gives added value in that you now have more flexibility, so if something happens in one place, you can still be present almost fully in the marketplace. and that resilience- there's value in that resilience. but what it then means is that, um, every businesses, or the businesses that Embrace that value, are going to have a different cost basis, and that cost basis then has implications for what inflation might look like and and so that's a third thing, and- and I think that that's an important thing- you hear people talk about friendship, insuring, on shuring. all those things are to some extent about sort of changing your business model for how you're going to get inputs to production. now, all three of those things I would say are: we are influx today, right, we have not settled this out. so I talked to a lot of businesses. they all tell me: well, the first, they don't tell me. they ask me: what are you doing for your hybrid work policy? like there's still a lot of uncertainty about what The Sweet Spot is for where we we should settle out, and I would say many families haven't really figured out. many workers haven't figured out exactly what the perfect mix is either. um, and so, in all of these we're in, we're in a transition. I I would say we are not in an equilibrium from a Workforce or or or business production standpoint, and so it's a super interesting time, I think, for um, for academics and researchers. there's a lot of work that you're going to be able to do um, actually, I, I should count myself among a lot of what we're going to be able to do to have new discovery about U, about how economies work, both at the macro and the micro level. yeah, it's definitely an interesting time and it's a great time to be in school to be able to debate these Concepts, so we're really lucky to be here. I mean, you touched on the labor force. a lot of the growth in the labor force has been in specific sectors like government and Healthcare, rather than kind of across the board, and it's kind of unusual to have the labor force growing with interest rates so high. do you think that will continue or do you think some other sectors will kick in? so you know what's interesting. um, over time or so everyone remembers the pandemic- everything crashed right and what H? what has happened is that the recovery- sector to sector- did not all happen at the same time- and it's been interesting- government and the healthcare sectors were some of the slowest to recover right. so, on some sense, what we we've seen in the last 6 months or so- because you know, a disproportionate amount of the new jobs created have been in those two sectors- is that's, that's somewhat catchup right and other parts of the economy have they. they bounce back much faster, and it's been. it's taken more time for them to go. one of the things that we've been watching, though, is sort of the- it's funny to call it like this- but the residual. so if you take out the catch-up sectors, if you take out government, if you take out Healthcare, what does that look like? and, um, up until the last two or three months, the residual space was really Contracting, such that it was just at break. even there were, there were almost no new jobs being produced in that space. um, in the last couple months, we started to see an uptick in the residual. now the residual is actually the majority of the economy, which is why it's funny to call it residual. but but if you divide it, ketchup and everybody else, the, everybody else is starting to grow now. uh, and that is is quite interesting, that that's broadening the base of prosperity. yeah, that that's good to hear. it makes me optimistic. um, we know that monetary policy is is very broad brushed. the economy as a whole, um, does the real estate sector ever, you know, specifically enter your thinking in these debates at the Open Market Committee? uh, well it it better, okay, I mean I so. so one level, look, look, if you think about the great financial crisis that was driven by excesses in real estate, like that's, housing markets, that is real estate at a fundamental level, and I, I think you know, before then, um, housing had been viewed as sort of sort of a trailing indicator. so, when the economy is strong, housing be strong. when the economy weakens, housing weakens, and people didn't think of it as potentially being able to precipitate sort of that kind of, um, broad-based disruption. uh, but we also know that commercial real estate can do that, a can do that like. we've seen this in various episodes across the the history of this country, and so what important, and you know, I'll just say for me, um, I think about real estate a lot because during the great financial crisis, more banks failed in my district, in the six District, than anywhere else in the country, and it was largely because of concentrations in real estate holdings by these Bank institutions. so so we talk about real estate all the time to make sure that our institutions are uh understanding and appreciating the risk that it carries, in addition to the opportunities it presents, and then are holding enough Capital to present itself, to protect itself from those risks, should they, should they sort of uh appear or emerge. so it is, it is definitely an important thing. um, I would also say that you know we do a lot in our bank thinking about local economies as well as sort of the macro economy, because, ult, eventually and ultimately, uh, the macro is just the sum of a bunch of micros and so if the micros aren't working, it's hard to imagine how the macro going to work. uh, and one of the things that we see in this space as well is that, um, if uh real estate difficulties are concentrated in particular parts of a of an urban space right, that can have significant impacts and implications, negative implications- for the ability of regular people who are approximate to that to thrive in important ways. so we definitely want to understand all these things. I, you know, I go out and I talk and I ask lots of questions to make sure I have an understanding of that. yes, I know it's very nice to have somebody with the real estate background in the, the position of power that you have about power, you have power, um, you also have I- this is something I don't know, I have to go find this out, but there's a home ownership affordability monitor, a, I guess we want to put it as initials- um, that it tells you that Miami, Fort Lauderdale, West Palm Beach, that metro area is the least affordable area in your district, and I think we probably know that if you know anybody who's trying to afford, especially their first house. so you know, I guess, first of all, why should people who are not in the first house market even care about that? and, secondly, what can be done to make housing more affordable. so, um, thanks for that, thanks for the, the plug on on our tool. so, um, and I- I don't actually like acronyms, so this one, one of my things- I- Oh, I thought you did that on purpose to call it home. oh, oh, they did, okay, I, I don't, I, I just don't, I just don't say, I won't say that. so so, okay, so we have, so we. so, before I get into the affordability issue. I would just say we got lots of tools that are available for you to use, and and we try to make them accessible and and easy to understand and for regular people, so you don't need a PhD and Eon to understand these things. so we have a home ownership affordability monitor. we have a rental affordability monitor, the the. the home ownership affordability model is National. we do it for each metro area, uh. the rental affordability model is for the southeastern states. that's our district. um. we have a wage tracker. we have a GDP now tracker, lots of an inflation dashboard. all of these are online. um, there's actually an app called economy now, uh, that you can download and it'll it'll send you little plugs of updates for things that we're doing. I would encourage all of you to subscribe to just get the blast on a on a weekly basis about all the things we're trying to do, because one of our goals is to help help every American, every person in the world, actually uh be positioned and understand where things are, so that they're as informed as we are. like, ultimately, me, just hoarding all the information that's not useful. we want make sure everyone one is position to be as successful as possible, so so go do that? um, affordability is is a real Challenge and um, it's a challenge for a number of reasons. one is just the, the um, the mechanics of adding units, takes time. so you, this is a, this is a real estate group, so I, many of you, are real estate. I don't know if everyone is, but it takes time, like I. I've been using analogy recently. so if, if the Campbell Soup company realized that there was an increase of demand for cream and mushroom, right, they just add a shift and they produce more cream and mushroom and as, as about as, in the marketplace very quickly. if, if the City of Coral Gables, Real, realizes, or developer X realizes there's a shortage of housing, um, it'll be three years before any of that housing actually comes to Marketplace in many, many places, right, and so you have to have a well oiled planning infrastructure, um, space infrastructure, Capital Market infrastructure if you are going to have any hope of having a local real estate market, respond to the ups and downs of demand and Supply, um, that may happen in an economy. so that's a baseline challenge that we have. Second Challenge: new housing, if it comes on in many places, starts at the top right, that's where you're going to get most of the highest return on your investment. uh, particularly when there are constraints that are put on what you can build. because a fourth, a third element is: um, what actually shows up in the marketplace is a negotiation between the developer and the local community. you've got to get approvals, you've got to get the neighborhoods to to buy off on these things, uh and and so, or sign off on these things and and so. um, in many instance I- I lived in Los Angeles before I had this job- communities always down zoned it, they always made it smaller, they always made it less right, and that meant that the amount that came on was always probably less than what the analyst would suggest the market actually needs. and so you have this long Arc where the the number of people coming in is greater than the number of units. and you know, econ tells you if demand is greater than Supply, the price goes up right, and so a lot of what we have is just is just basic supply and demand, and particularly in markets that are growing. and so you think about Florida, like Florida is a importer of people right now, like there are more people coming in here from all over the place, and so it puts extra pressure on the supply side to be able to respond. uh, and it's. it's just been a challenge it has, and I know it's not on my list here, but I think we sent up the live local act that probably most of the real estate people in here are familiar with was past by the state legislature with the goal of opening up land for development, for affordable housing, and I don't if you have any thoughts on that. yeah, I gave a speech on, I mentioned this last week. so, yes, I, um, I am actually interested in it. look, um, the Liv local is a is an interesting strategy where it says you can build housing in commercial and Industrial zoned locations and don't need to get special dispensation or anything for that and the height and sort of density restrictions are eased off on it. uh, it's super interesting, I, because you know zoning in many regards has been, uh, sort of a major constraint on the ability to add Supply, like if you it says certain things are not happening in certain places and if the number of places you can build housing is small, guess what you're going to get a small number of units, like that's kind of what it says and this is trying to open that up. what'll be interesting for me is, um, or what I see as interesting is it's: this is actually a test of the extent to which local markets have evolved in ways that have gone beyond what the zoning imagined the land use could be or should be. uh, because now we're going to see a bunch of developers like: just because something you can do something there doesn't mean that you will like. it will depend on their assessment of what the market is and what the market can support, and so I think it's going to be a tremendous experiment. so this has been up for about a year and a half, something like that- right, uh, past, not too long ago, uh, and so I think we're just at a point where we're going to start seeing what comes to Market and sort of what gets built, and, uh, I'm expecting this- another area where we're going to learn a lot and- and I and me and my team will be definitely watching this to to understand because it is- it is- pretty innovative. yeah, it's definitely something different that I have not seen in other places. um, speaking of the sort of academic world, I know that you have experienc dealing with sort of hypothetical situations, so let me ask you to take, you know, two sides of a a perspective, and you know what, in in 18 months, if inflation is still at the threes, let me ask you what you think the, the impact on the macroeconomy, on rates, on markets, will be. and then also if inflation gets fairly quickly down to your 2% Target. so sort of Good Side, Bad Side. so I try not to live in hypotheticals any these days, I know, but you know how to do it. um, yeah, that's a detail. I so look, if, if inflation stalls out or even starts moving in in the opposite direction, away from our Target, I don't think we'll have any um, any other option but to respond to that. if it seems that the level of restrictiveness that we're at today is not enough to do the job or get the job done, I'd have to be open to increasing rates. that's just the reality, because ultimately we have a Target and if people start to think that we are okay, away from our Target, their expectations about how the economy is going to evolve are likely to shift in ways that are are not optimal. all right, so what? what we know with inflation? when inflation is high, people are and businesses are less likely to fully invest in Long Run options because their expectation about where prices are going to be out in the distance is going to be very high, and that means that certain sorts of Investments aren't going to make sense anymore, right, and that the low investment, the low inflation environment is one that I think um sets up the economy for its most, for strongest and most resilient pos position coming out into the future, because families will be willing to invest much more in their human capital and their Capa capabilities and capacity, and businesses will as well. inflation is high. it means that people are not going to want to invest, you're just going to want to consume. now it pulls your consumption Horizon much more into the present and you know we can consume more, that that can work. but if we do that at the expense of Investments, when we get out three, five, 10 years, we will be in a much worse position, and so getting inflation under control and getting it back to a place, um, that is, uh, where we want it to be is very important. and I'll just say: one of the things that we track to make sure that we understand the implications of things is we track expectations, like where people and businesses think inflation is going to be five years from now. uh, and we use that as an important measure because everyone really appreciates that in the short run you're going to have bouncing around. things happen, uh, but it's on average. where are we going to wind up? and one thing that's been true through the pandemic is that those longer run expectations have stayed pretty stable. people still have confidence that this is an episode that we're going to get through and we're, and we get to the other side, we'll be back in a place where people feel comfortable that long run Investments make sense. and if they feel that today, that means that they're likely. this means that they're more likely to make those Investments as we move forward and and really look through the volatility that we've had today. so if it stays high for a long time, there's a risk that those expectations start migrating up. we call that in like fed speak, they talk. if you hear people talk about inflation be expectations becoming unanchored. that means they're moving away from that long run number that they've been at for a long time and that's a problem. we we need to make sure that that doesn't happen. so, on the other hand, um, so economist right? um, on the other hand, like if inflation were to fall more rapidly, uh, then for me I would say that's great, um, and if it mean if it, if it it's accompanied with the economy staying strong, that's even better. and it says that, you know, maybe we pull forward some of the uh in moves of interest rates, uh, because we will just be getting closer to there. look, we can't wait till we get to 2% to remove our restrictiveness, or else there's a possibility we overshoot, right, and I'd like to avoid that if we can. um, and so we'll just have to watch. so I mean, when I describe risks today and risks to our Outlook, I see them as as broadly balanced. there are some stories that say it it's going to go slower, and there are some stories that say it's going to go faster. uh, and if you, if I can, this, folks, the likelihood people fall about 50/50 on those two sides. that's actually um, that's, that's a good reality to understand. well, makes me feel better sitting up here. so, having asked a whole bunch of questions, let me see if there's questions from the audience. we have a couple people with microphones, we have one here. good afternoon, Mr President. my name is Nelson Sor. I am a professor of Economics at Miami dat College. thank you for for joining us today. um, I just have a quick question. we've been discussing this in my classrooms a lot. so economic data right now is very, uh, strong for the most part. wage growth has been rising, uh, inflation is falling and the econom is just generally strong. however, if you ask the average Joe on the street, they feel pessimistic about the economy. so there seems to be a disconnect between the, the, the sentiment, consumer sentiment and just sentiment in general about the economy and actual data. so I mean, there's- I've heard different reasons why that might be, but we wanted to get your, your take on that, thank you. so that's a good question- is a question many people are asking today, and I I would say, um, people don't live inflation, people live prices, and when inflation is high, the price becomes high, and when inflation goes up faster than wages, prices feel like they're moving away from what people can handle, and that's not a good feeling. that's never a good feeling, and once people get to that point, um, they remember what prices used to be. now, if you think about the dynamic in the economy today, um, the rate of inflation has slowed. it has not gone to zero and it is not gone negative, right, which means that prices are going to stay where they are, by and large, right. and what's going to happen and what will eventually happen is, well, if, if- according to my Outlook, I should say this- is that wages are going to catch up, right. so when inflation spiked to 7%, wage growth was 3%. everyone fell behind. everybody knew it. they went to the gas station, they went to the grocery store and it was like Wow, got to spend all this extra money um wages today, wage growth today is greater than inflation, right, so they fall behind. they're starting to catch up. they haven't 100% caught up, so people know they're still behind, but every month they're growing faster than prices are, um, and they're getting to be where they can handle it. now, psychology is a funny thing, because people don't do math ruthlessly, like they don't come out of the grocery store and say, oh, last time I was there, um, I had seven cents in my, in my um wallet. now I have 12 cents, right, like that's a level of awareness and sensitivity which is not really going to move the dial in terms of how people experience things. it will only be after. it was 7 cents and now it's like 57 cents, that you start to see it becomes more Salient, right, but that takes time. that's an arc that that people that we have to experience. um, so I take comfort, because I I am the, the, the wonky guy who's doing the math- to know that, uh, workers are are catching up, right, the economy is. the Dynamics we have today are such that every month, mon, the burden of the high price is lower and at some point they will actually s their weight, their income will surpass it, such that they will then be how the economy was and has been for a long time. on average, in our regular state state wages are about one to one and a half percentage points higher than inflation, uh, and so real incomes have been positive, people's standard of living has been uh, growing and people have become more resilient. those are are the things that we're going to get back to, but that but that will take time and psychology doesn't change, so regulated. so that's kind of how I think about it. um, you know, I I'm with my family, we have family get togethers. I hear about high prices, right, people, people talk to me about, you know, steak costs too much, eggs cost too much. like, like, so, so I live it just like everybody else. um, I never asked them to do math, right that? that that's not the type of thing they want to hear. so, like, just be patient. if the economy continues to grow, there will be a time when the burden just seems less. anybody else, everyone here- okay, but then we come, then we come down, we'll start up there. um, I know the fedman adamant about saying that they're datadriven and, uh, analyst Associates, whoever's been pricing in three rate cuts for the year. is there any data or indexes or metrics that you're seeing that you know are make you believe that it's going to be one cut? I know, you know PPI just ticked up, but I don't know if there's anything that you see that makes you think different from you know what the three Cuts is expected to be. so let me, um, let me answer this in two ways. so, um, um, just so, we all level set. so, every quarter, every other fomc meeting, uh, all 12 presidents and all seven Federal Reserve Governors are asked to offer their assessment of where inflation, where unemployment, where GDP and where our policy rate should is going to be at the end of this year, the end of next year and the end of the year after, and then we do some law around stuff and we don't talk to each other in putting that, those things together. we just send it in and then what we do is we just do a plot of what everybody said, right, and that's so. the thing is called The Dot Plot. it's in the summary of economic projections and what typically happens is that when we do the Dot Plot, people will say Okay, given where we are now, if they can look at what people put in, and they're like, oh well, that means that there's going to be one cut at some point, there'll be two cuts, depending on what the numberers. and they just do the math to see how many cuts. and the cuts are always- they assume are always- 25 basis points. all right, um, and so then they key on the median person, the median position. they say, look if, if we had a vote of the whole group, the median position is the position that would win that vote, and they take that as a sign that the committee wants to do that, whatever number of cuts that median position is. and I I went through all that just to say that the Dot Plot is not actually a decision, it's not a conversation that anyone's had. it is just raw math, and the thing that's not in that is what the Outlook is or what the assumptions are about how the economy is going to advance for all 19 of us. right, because it could be that some of us expect the economy to grow like 30%, some of us are expecting recession, and those narratives kind of govern what it is. we're not all working from that same expectation, right, so I don't put a lot of stock on the dot plots. it's a, it's a, you know, it's a nice device and and it gives it. for me, the thing that's most useful is it gives a picture of the diversity of views that the committee has about what the possible looks like. uh, and what we've seen is for this year is kind of narrowing a bit relative to where we were at the beginning next year. the diversity views is pretty Broad and because there's uncertainty in how the economy will come out. what I would say is this: between the last stop plot and this one, um, there has been a shift towards fewer Cuts, even though the median did not move, and this is because if you look at, sort of um, what the distribution is around the median. um, the skew moved much more to fewer Cuts than than more, and that's actually quite interesting. I would just say this: um, the outlook on what an appropriate policy trajection trajectory looks like is purely a function of what our expectation of where the economy is likely to go moving forward and how inflation is likely to progress. um, this time last year- well, maybe it was like June last year- I thought there'd be one cut for this year because I thought inflation was going to come down slow and the economy continue to grow contract slow. at the end of last year, um, inflation had come down really fast for the last 6 months of 2023- faster than I expected- and I took that on board to say, okay, I thought it was going to be slow, but maybe clearly is not going as slow as I thought, and if that's the case and I can pull forward my uh, my cuts, and so I was open for two cuts for this year. right now, you take the first three months of this year and basically inflation has kind of stopped or stalled out a bit, uh, and it made me go back to one cut, right, and so it is. in all of these cases, the progression is about the information set that you have and what the expectation of your outlook is. um, I'm i' most recently I've sort of been on the fewer Cuts side of the the the conversation, but if the economy uh started to move such that inflation moved fast, I'd move right and I really want and this. so I liked how you started data driven, because we are looking for the data. we want the data to inform how the economy is evolving. uh, because that sort of governs what we need to do. and just, I was talking earlier today. we got two mandates right and everyone should view our projected um policy approaches based on those mandates. what's happening with employment and what's happening with inflation? and those two things are the things that I look at more than anything else. I mean, there's a lot of other data out there, there are a lot of other ways to assess the economy, but we definitely want to make sure that, uh, that we never side of those two measures. hey, Mr BOS, thanks so much for coming. my name is jino tabot. I'm a gr student at the real estate development program. uh, as you may have heard in the news, a number of states like Texas and Florida are looking to have more power when it comes to the topic of immigration part, their formulas, the power of deportation and, anecdotally, we have heard some people say that they they're too scared and they want to leave wherever they're working, such as vegetable Pickers. my question to you is: if they had, if they win in the courts, what do you feel that could be the impact economically speaking, and also on inflation to a degree? thanks, so you know there's. there's an interesting um report that the Congressional budget office came out with just a couple of weeks ago on immigration and its contribution to the labor force. uh and um, and how they the. I think the punchline was they filled in a lot of space and and sort of released some of the pressure in labor markets, such that work, more work was happening than what we anticipated was likely to happen, right? so so my, the, my point on starting there is that, look, production is a numbers game, right, and it's about how many workers you have to do the work that's required relative to how much Supply is demanded. if you don't have enough workers to do the work, um, then you're going to have a scarcity, right, and there'll be upward pressure on prices, and we've seen this in number of instances. so even before the pandemic, labor markets in the US were incredibly tight, uh, and you know you talk to businesses. they were struggling to hire people, so, so I think we there would be real questions about what the Dynamics are for local markets, about how much production was possible. now, one thing that's been interesting is, um, the tight labor markets have actually caused a lot of businesses to think about introducing technology to try to um increase the productivity of of workers so you can actually get more output without necessarily having to hire more workers. so I never forget the first time I was at a restaurant and a robot brought my my food right, like those. those are the sorts of things. or, or now I know I can order at McDonald's, I can get my two, two cheeseburgers meal U. all those things are ways that that that businesses are trying to use technology to have productivity um be a substitute for having to hire more people. uh, and so it we are. we are closely tracking that, because those kind of changes have have the likelihood or the possibility of increasing the productive capacity of the country, uh, which then means that you can see larger growth without seeing significant increases in pricing pressures, and that that's an important Dynamic for thinking about how inflation is likely to progress. we'll do one more, one of the students. hi, Mr bosing, thank you for being here. uh, my question is: will the FED continue to monetize record breaking federal budget deficits, and is the sustainability of the national debt beginning to creep into the fed's conscience? yeah, so I actually think about it a little differently than how you put it. I I don't think we're actively monetizing the debt. um, we have a balance sheet. uh, it includes treasuries and that that is part of of the way that the federal government raises money, but we don't have the. we're not, we don't have treasuries on our balance sheet because of any kind of fiscal impulse like the. the treasuries we have on our balance sheet are directly a function of, uh, our response, our crisis response, to try to keep liquidity in markets, and that's an important thing. so, um, just so, so everybody so level set, so great financial crisis happens. um, the ability of businesses to get liquidity to fund payroll like large companies basically looked like it was on the verge of stopping right. that's a problem because if, if AT&T and GM and GE can't cover their payroll, you're not going to be able to to to use a credit card or anything like that, right, and so the FED at that time- and I was not on on the FED at that time- decided we need to take steps to maintain and ensure there's liquid in the marketplace, and they did that by buying treasuries. and they did that by buying mortgage back Securities. there was a housing crisis then, so we wanted to make sure mortgage markets continue to function as well. right, and we did that. I did it for a long time, because there was lots of uncertainty about how long it would take the US economy to be able to stand on its feet again. and if you're going to do an, an intervention, you want to keep doing the intervention until the healing is done. you don't want to. you don't want to just stop taking the medic medication before you're fully healed, because then you're going to get sick again, right, then the great financial CR. then Co happens? same concerns about liquidity, right, so we bought all these these things. we have a balance sheet that includes them on them. uh, we are actually today trying to reduce the size of our balance sheet. so every month, we are selling. well, when treasuries mature, we're not. we're not buying them back right to the same extent. we're trying to do it in an orderly way so that we don't disrupt these markets and to not function, uh, but it is very much in an emergency, you do emergency things and when you move away from the emergency, you pull back the emergency things. we are doing exactly those things and eventually I want to, I think, is it be appropriate for us to get to a place where we have none of these assets, or very few of these assets, on our balance sheet, because we will have been past the emergency and the markets, these financial markets? they need to operate, uh, on their own and stand on their own and, ultimately, that's where we're going to get to. but, just like I said, with inflation, um, this is not something that happens in two days, right, this is something that's going to take some time, uh, and we're going to do all we can to get our balance sheet to where it needs to get to. well, I think that that is a good spot to end this conversation and suggest that people can continue it with each other. outside. we have a a light reception for you to be able to discuss these ideas. hopefully, things that you have heard here today have been useful, whether you are a student or somebody in the commercial real estate market or somebody in the financial markets, and that you will take advantage of all of the information offered to you by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. there are Flyers out there that will tell you about all of the services and the data that's available. we are really lucky to have that and to have them in our corner. so, thank you. what, uh, can I just say? one other thing I did should have said this: This Woman's a rock star. um, it is great to share, it's an honor to share the stage with her. I've I've worked with Andrea for, uh, many, many years. she's always been a clear voice of analytical sanity, uh, and she's fun to be around us at the same time, and that's a a great combination. so thank you for the invitation. it's really good to to be here with you. reception.



