https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X7XhZhsyct4

Fireside Chat: UF Real Estate Trends and Strategies Conference

Raphael Bostic

the University of Florida's Kelley A. Bergstrom Real Estate Center's 2024 Trends and Strategies Conference

Mar 01, 2024

he's [Applause] the he? uh. he became the 15th president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta in 2017. uh, as some of you know, he's a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, the main monetary policymaking uh board uh uh entity of the Federal Reserve Bank. um, before joining the bank, he was a professor of public policy and economics at University of Southern California, which is where we uh first met. he's also served as assistant secretary for housing at the Department of Housing and Urban Development and spent a few years as a research Economist at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. he eared his PhD in economics from Stanford University and his undergraduate degree from uh from Harvard. so, I mean, I've known rafhael for about 25 years. I've asked him a couple of times to join us for this event. uh, as you might suspect, he has a busy calendar, but I'm really glad we were able to to work it out this year and get and uh get this into your schedule. so please join me in welcoming uh Dr bosk to the the. thank you. so he's a monetary policy expert? uh, I am not, but let's start with some kind of big picture uh macro stuff. so I guess this to set the stage: the economy has performed relatively well. real GDP growth was 2.5% in 2023, I think. the fourth quarter annualized numbers through 3.2, 3.3%, uh, and. and unemployment has paid pretty well too, uh, and so you wouldn't expect traditional economic theory, doesn't expect that kind of a result or that kind of an economy in the face of steeply rising interest rates. so do any of the guys and girls at the fed or any other economists. can they explain what happened to us? why that's occurred? well, um, first of all, good, good afternoon everyone. it's really good to be here. it's good to see you, David, thank you for the invitation. um, you know, Professor Ling is one of my favorite people and we've worked together for for many, many years trying to develop the real estate industry from an academic side, and he's truly a leader, not only for this state but nationally. so it's it's always great to to to share the stage with you. you know, in in terms of of your question. um, I try to remind people all the time, when I think about the economy, that, uh, we've just gone through a bunch of unprecedented things and, uh, like a global pandemic, for example. uh, and, if you think about how models are built, they're built on data. that's really reflecting how we've lived in our experiences in the past, and the pandemic is something that we just don't have an example of in our historical data, uh, and so the models aren't particularly helpful in that regard. they can give some directionality, but the Precision on them is is really quite poor, and it really requires you to do a bunch of other things, which is uh, uh, which we tried to do in terms of just keeping our finger on the pulse of the economy. we may talk more about that, um. a second thing I would say, though, um, that is that's been quite interesting recently- is, um, that we, we have an environment where, uh, I think we've seen a, a, a short-term spike in productivity, uh, and that's a way that you can continue to see the economy expand without seeing upward pressure on prices. I think that's that's actually been an important part of the story as well. a third part is, uh, sort of the unexpected, uh, uh positive change in terms of Labor Supply. uh, at the beginning of the pandemic, there was a lot of concern about, uh, would we see SE segments of the economy or SE segments of the labor force come back in force? for example, we, our bank, we did a report very early in the pandemic, saying that the child care sector was going to have significant problems because they already were running with with small margins. and then we have to shut down the economy the way we did. uh, many of them were not going to be able to just ramp up immediately afterwards, and that has implications for families that have young children, and could they actually come back into the economy with the same strength it turns out that they have, which has been quite interesting. um, and then the the um. the last thing I would say is: uh, we are having a lot of debate about the efficacy of our policies, right? so usually if you get a 5 percentage Point increase in interest rates, You' expect a lot of people to just retrench and stop being active and engaging in the economy, and that hasn't happened. we've had tremendously resilient consumer uh, and an amazingly powerful business sector. I think part of that actually comes from the fact that, as we were getting closer to a period where people thought we might have to increase interest rates, uh, we saw lots of people lock in those very low rates. so on, in housing, we know, if you had a 3% mortgage, you locked that in, you did the refine and made that a stand. and the same thing happened for many businesses that we've talked to. now the business loans are shorter term, so those will become an issue, uh, in the coming years, but for the time being, um, the interest rate sensitivity is probably a little lower than you would have expected under ordinary circumstances, right, right, but we, you know, we'll talk a little bit about the wave of maturities that's coming in commercial real estate. so that's another thing that is, uh, yeah, I think people here might be interested in that. yeah, you might have, you might have a few thoughts on that. but I mean, certainly let's talk about inflation a little bit, because I'm sure that's on everyone's mind. um, the FED, as you all know, has two mandates for Price stability, and and full employment, um and um, the the, the inflation, some people say is sort of the cruestv all taxes, right, especially for lower middle- income households. but this, this fight to tame inflation, has consequences, right, the increase in interest rates, both shortterm, uh and and longterm, not as big of an impact on employment as I think many, many people thought. but I mean, can you talk about the difficulties of sort of balancing that inflation battle against the benefits of of, uh, you know, Full Employment and lower interest rates. yeah, so, when I think about inflation, the first thing to note is that we've come a long way already, right? so inflation was at 7%, some measures as high as 9 or 10%, and now many of the measures are in the low threes or high twos, so that's a tremendous amount of progress that's occurred, and it's happened actually, a lot faster than I expected, so I'm really grateful for that progress. uh, and it and it's been quite interesting, uh. I do think, though, that you know the job's not done. you know our Target is 2%, uh and um, uh. you know when, when I think about it, people are. if you watch the news, you see people saying: well, you know, it's come so far U, we're basically at 2%, so why don't you just get back to normal and cut the rates and do all that sort of stuff? and it makes me think back to the moments right before the pandemic when our, our inflation was at 1.7 or 1.8% and there was all this angst about the FED not being able to meet its Target. right, so if you're at 2.9 um and is all right, then we shouldn't have been talking about that when we were at 1.7 to 1.8, and I I I say that just to say, uh, we should be mindful of what what success looks like, what in the neighborhood looks like- and it's a lot closer than than I think- where a lot of people are- are are, uh, viewing it, or how they're viewing it moving forward, and that's that's an important thing. um, another thing I would just say is, um, the trends are not always so straightforward, and what we've seen so often through the course of the last three and a half, or actually the whole time I've been in this job, is, um, just the unexpected happening, the non-traditional thing occurring, uh, which means that we have to have to really stay vigilant and make sure that, um, that we're, that the signal that we think we're seeing is actually the signal that exists, and that requires a lot of of hard work. yeah, I'm going to ask you about you know what signals you actually, uh, you actually look for, but but again, on on price stability. I, how, I mean, how, how close do you think we are to achieving price stability and what are your concerns? uh, what keeps you up at night? what do you worry about that could sort of derail the, the fight, the fight against inflation. yeah, so, so we, we made good progress. yeah, like, like, like I'm I'm pleased we're not there, um, and like, for me, I think I want to see more evidence that, uh, the world is returning back to normal. um, we've been in a like the pandemic, totally unexpected, and it threw the economy into places that, uh, I wouldn't have anticipated seeing, uh, and it created a whole host of dynamics that you know I wouldn't have predicted either. so, you know, at the, at the beginning of the pandemic, there was an expectation we're going to lose millions of jobs, tons of businesses, and it would be a very difficult hole to get out of. we saw a really muscular policy responses, both from, uh, the Federal Reserve, but also from a fiscal perspective, and the goal of those was really to create this bridge to try to keep as many families and as many businesses whole at the end of the pandemic as we had at the beginning, and, by and large, I think that policy was effective. the other Dynamic that I don't think I love say I hadn't thought completely through, was the reality that, because we didn't lose jobs, we had a lot of people, um, who were still getting paid. they were still getting their incomes on a regular basis, but they weren't able to spend the way they would have ordinarily, and so they wound up with a lot of extra money in their, in their bank accounts, uh, compared to where we would have expected to see it. uh, and that's been, that's been quite gratifying. so where does neighborhood look like? we're? we're working on that. I would say you got to look at the Topline number, but then you actually have to look at some of the other aspects of inflation. now, one thing that, uh, I've been looking at is in these indices. so you know it's a, a basket of goods and you can actually calculate the inflation of each element of the basket, each piece of that, and under nor normal times there there's always volatility in prices, but you'll have a certain fraction- maybe about 20% of the basket at any time is showing price changes above 5%, and it may be like 30 or 40% show price changes above 3%. uh, above and below, we have some degree of symmetry and so that's a sense that gives you a sense of the overall um Collective pressure on prices that exists in the marketplace. so I said the 5% number is historically has been about 20. today it's about 35, 35 to 40, and so that says that, even though the Topline number is showing a nice average and is being offset, because we've seen, uh really a real significant decline in, uh the price pressure for goods, um, there's still a lot of significant uh price pricing pressure out there in the marketplace that we have to make sure we get back into normal zone. so it's those sorts of things that I'm looking at, uh to try to try to make sure that that I'm that, that that inflation is truly going to get to 2%. and let me just say one last thing on this um, which is that, um, we don't, I don't- want to have to raise rates again, right? so I want to make sure that when we start cutting rates, it's going to be a One Direction move that gets us back to neutral, so that we can be done, because we have to start going down and then up and then down and then up. um, everyone is going to be more worried about inflation, everyone's going to be thinking about this more significantly, which will cause people and businesses, I think, to really be much more hesitant and making investments in themselves and in their businesses that can get us to Long Run productive capacity. so you're you, I think you just kind of indicated that you're more concerned about um easing too soon than you are about waiting too long to ease. that it's that airing on the side of keeping rates High a little longer might be better than well. well, look we, we have a dual mandate, so I don't I don't want to make it seem like we're ignoring the one side of the Mandate, but the reality is: look, when we started raising rates, the unemployment rate was about 3.6%. today it's 3.7%, yeah, right, so. so that part of the Mandate is. we're still doing very well on it and just as a as a reference point, when I started this job, the notion of Full Employment that that many economists had was somewhere in the 4.3%- 4.4%. so from a historic perspective, our labor market is performing far better than anyone would have anticipated just a few years ago, and and so, given that as a benchmark, then I can focus more on making sure that the other part of our mandate gets all the way there now. the risks for most of the pandemic for me were all: let's get inflation to 2%, and if there's got to be damage that happens to labor markets, so be it. as it's gotten closer now, the risks are more balanced, and I do worry- uh, I'm worrying increasingly about the extent to which our policy is going to adversely affect labor markets as well, but we still have to get inflation back to our Target, if we have. if, if I've learned one thing in the last five years, it's really how you started. the question is that people really don't like inflation, like they really don't like inflation, and so we need to make sure that we get that handled and people will, and we- we've done surveys and things. we show. if it's between High inflation and and higher unemployment rates, everyone said let's do the higher unemployment rates. that that is something that we've heard loud and clear. yeah, well, the labor market, as you say, has been pretty remarkable. um, I think, under 4% employment for 24, 25 stra- it's unprecedented. it's really incredible and surprised. yet, yeah, yeah, shocking, yeah, but I have to ask you about the 2% Target. this is a question actually students ask and and, by the way, I, I, I have to say we're all fed Watchers. now, right, I mean I, I, I've never had students before come up to me and say like I would know well, what's the FED going to do. I mean, I think you, there's a lot. there's a lot more eyes on you than probably ever, uh, in the past, but it wasn't until what? 2012. that then chairman banki, uh, of the FED, said, uh, along with the others, said, let's set 2% as the target. so a question: I get asked: why 2%? I'm asking you all right, so I'm just going to say right off the bat: I didn't pick it right, so so I- I wasn't in the room, but you kept- but you kept a minute ago saying you're managing to get to that 2%. so, yeah, so, so when you have, when you, when you have a go goal line, you, you actually have to try to get to the goal line, and since that was called out, then that's kind of what we have to do. the way I think about this is the sign of a health, a healthy economy is going to be one where there is upward pressure on prices at some level. to some extent, that's a sign that we are pro producing higher value ad materials, that we are innovating, that we're doing all these things, uh, to increase standards of living. if that and so then the question is if you're going to have some positive amount of inflation, like how high is too high, and so you want. so for me, I I think that the I think about this: if it goes too high, then everyone is going to the Horizon for investment shortens, and the type of Investments that makes sense to en engage in shrinks right and, and so we want to make sure that is not so high that people and businesses are reluctant to to really be thoughtful about what investments are going to make them the most productive three, five and 10 years out, uh, and so so. so, that's, that's, that's the attention now. could it be two and a half? could it be one and a half? could like? so that's a conversation to have. um, what I would say is: um, it's not going to be zero, that's a bad one, okay. and it's not going to be 5% either, that's a bad one. it's got to be somewhere in between there. and then the last thing I would just say on this is: we're not going to have that conversation until we're through the pandemic, right, and and that that is an important thing to think about, because if we moved it now and said, oh, two and a half is good, you know, people are just going to feel like, oh, they just moved it, move the gold poost for convenience, just so that people stop looking at the FED. right, and it really I think it will- it runs the risk of undermining people's confidence and our commitments to do things moving forward. so we want to make sure that we keep the goal posts where they are until we are in a place where, uh, we're, we're comfortable, we're there, and then you can have a different conversation. yeah, yeah, but, but now's not a good time to change the the go. I would hear it. I would definitely hear it. so I think everyone in the room is going to be interested in your sort of broad economic Outlook. we had a economist from kushman Wakefield yesterday. I, I, I think she used the term that she expected the economy to downshift in 20124. I think that was the term that she used. so, um, give us your- you know what's your- sort of broad BAS case Outlook. yeah, so to to some extent. so I never use that word um, but, but I think the dynamic is is quite aligned with that um. so right now, the economy is uh, producing at a level that is quite strong and stronger than what I think my team estimates the long run potential of the economy is. our estimate of that is somewhere in like the 1.8 to 2% range and, um, that would be a long-term sustainable level of growth that won't be putting pressure and triggering inflation. so, in the long run and in the medium term, I think my expectation and my Outlook is that we're going to get back to that uh and that'll be a pathway. and then the question is, uh, really, how long it will take for that to happen. uh, I will say that a year ago, my expectation was going to happen, uh, a lot faster than where I think it, how. I think it's going to happen now. uh, because the economy has been incredibly resilient and, you know, consumer spending uh has continued to be quite strong, uh, even in the face of these higher interest rates and and the inflation we're see. and a contributing factor to this is the fact that wage growth is actually moved positive relative to inflation recently. so families are actually starting to feel like they're catching up and feeling much more secure about uh, their prospects moving forward. all those things are are good signs. so this these are good problems to have economy that's too strong, but what it means is that it'll probably be longer uh before inflation gets back to our two% Target uh, and you know that's. I'm willing to wait, I'm not in a hurry, we're not just in a dash to two just to get to two. we're really trying to navigate and manage a broader economy and so if we can continue to have wonderful job growth, great output in prod production and inflation, continues it its March. if it goes slower, I'll take that, we'll take it. oh, let me say one other thing, um, which is that, um, all of that is couched with, um large confidence interval bands. I I said that of an econ profess professorial way, it's good to be back on a campus. I actually actually actually like that, this setting. but, um, and what I mean there is, there is tremendous uncertainty that exists in the world today and uncertainty around um what the prospects are for our economy moving forward. you know, at our bank, um, one of one of the tools we use are surveys. we do a lot of surveys is a survey of business uncertainty that we run. what we ask this is like: how certain are you that, um, your projection for revenue is going to be right? and what we've seen over the last several years is that the band of uncertainty for just about everything have gotten a lot wider, uh, and and so that Outlook is what it is, but we need to recognize that, um, every one is is a little less sure about what the next month, the next quarter and the next year are going to bring. uh, and that tentativeness is something we're just going to have to be mindful of, because that will affect the decisions that are made by businesses and families. uh, I think, potentially in very important ways, which is why it's so important that the fed's consistent with its messaging right, because, as I said, we're all fed Watchers now the stock market moves. we never CNN, quote you or anybody else, right? that's why we're not moving 2% exactly. we're all we're not changing. we're not changing that. so let's, let's talk for just a minute about, uh, commercial real estate. I think that the, the chat or the talk I mean is is the discussion is about office in particular, but the impact of the, the pandemic, um work from home on Commercial Real Estate and general office in particular. we hopefully have a minute to talk about that briefly. but I think maybe the biggest concern of many of the people in this room is this sort of this, uh, this, this wall of debt that we're, that, uh, we're facing. I think uh, over five, 00 billion of debt came due in 2023 and I think many thought that that would lead to some increase in default rates for closures. we've seen a little bit of that in the statistics, but not as much, and I I think that's because, you know, there's been a little bit of extend- pretend- mindset from the perspective of the lenders. they're willing to been willing to work with borrowers. I think many of you in this room um Can attest to that. but we've got another, I think, almost trillion dollars of CR debt coming due in 2024 and something like 2.2 trillion coming due, uh, by 2027. so, and with high- currently High- interest rates, um declining property values, which many expect to decline further as private Market valuations catch up, I me, these, these loans are going to be hard to refinance, potentially. so you know what is your, you know what is your view on that? uh, are you concerned about that? you, what, what are, what's your staff and other Economist telling you about that and how concerned are you about that? uh, that we're calling the wave of maturities, that that's coming down the pike, yeah, so, um, yes, everything you said, I me, I think you characterized it it quite well and, um, am I concerned? sure, I'm concerned, um, for me, I'm concerned on two Dimensions. one is, uh, really a baseline dim menion of financial stability, in the sense that we're a bank regulator and, coming out of the the great financial crisis, Financial stability was another thing that the Fed was now charged with paying attention to and thinking about, and so we've been talking to Bankers all over, uh, my district, my Six States, uh, to see sort of where they are in terms of concentration in their portfolios in commercial spaces. uh, and what we've heard has actually been relatively positive in the sense that a few banks are super concentrated in this stuff. I think part of that is, uh, an Evidence of Lessons Learned out of the great financial crisis. um, and that time, more banks failed in my district than anywhere else in the country, and that was largely because of concentrations in real estate, and so I think there, for many institutions in our, in our, in our area, um, they all remember that, like they're the survivors, they saw what happened when concentrations got too high and they just decided that we're we're going to make sure we're not exposing ourselves to that risk. there may be other things that happen, but that's not one that's going to going to go, so that that part we're going to continue to monitor, that they're going going to be some institutions that are going to have challenges at some point, but that's always been true. so the evidence that one or two Banks here or there is struggling I wouldn't take as a sign that the, the whole financial system is, is at risk, uh. then there's the other piece, which is the geographic distribution of these properties and and how the, the problem ones, wind up revealing themselves into the marketplace. because if there are concentrations geographically that could have implications for how local economies work, uh, what valuations look like for the properties adjacent to those, uh, and that could be an area or way that, uh, that spillover occurs, and we're going to have to watch that as well. um, and and and so I do worry about that. yeah, we, we, we tend to talk, and you have obviously have to think at a, at a macro level, but even The Economist yesterday pointed out that every City's its own story, right. so all these discussions about, about commercial real estate, uh in general, office in particular, are to some extent City specific. so the geography, uh really matters. but I do want to, I do want to ask you about office, I mean your, your, your contacts, your, your staff seem to think that Prime office space, high quality, relatively new office space- those markets are doing relatively well. uh, the older stuff, the stuff more located on the fringes of urban areas and Metro areas, maybe, uh, maybe not so well, um, and uh, CBR came out with report early this week. that said, I think 11 of the 17 major downtown areas that they track have seen year-over-year growth in Prime office rents in the past year. so that that's a. that's a good story. but what are your contacts uh telling you about and your staff telling you about the, the, the office Market? yes, we've been asking a lot of folks about this and um, you know, one of the things that's been interesting is we've heard sort of a sort of a duality in the marketplace: um, that if you're sort of a, a trophy type property, High amenity property in a neighborhood or in a place that is View is desirable and having a bunch of other amenities, your values are preserving, your um, your occupancy is preserving, uh, because the value is actually about more than just the office. it's about the, the whole experience that comes with that office, and that's important uh, and then there's a whole another class of um of space u that doesn't have that character and you know, I think of it like this: so during the pandemic- well before the pandemic- everyone had to go to an office, right? so the office was the office. you didn't have a choice about where you're going to work, uh, then the pandemic happens and everyone goes home and then they find out I actually have another office, right. and so how does this office compare to the other office? and if they're comparable or about the same, then most people are like, then let me just stay home, I don't need that, I don't need to go to that office and I don't need to, like, get dressed and do the hair and all that kind of stuff. I can just sort of stroll into the office, uh, and then just be on on camera, do my stuff, and that's good. I think that Dynamic is putting more pressure on uh results and more pressure on those um e effective substitutes, right, and and how that that plays out ultimately, I think will be quite interesting. yeah, yeah, I mean there's lots of talk. you know the new week be three days in the office, two at home. I mean, yeah, we're, we're, we're. two days a week, um, uh, one. so that's a question that I talk with everybody about now. um, we're all kind of groping for, um, the perfect sweet spot on this. um, we have so our bank. we have 1,700 people. we got, uh, six offices uh across the southeast. so, uh, we have to like real thoughts on this. so we do two, two days a week, uh, one day, and, and uh, the days. one day has to be an anchor day, uh, so everyone from a team agrees that they're going to come in a certain day of the week, and then the second day we've said: come in and try to engage with people not in your office, not in your group. so you start to get those spillovers and synergies that would ordinarily happen in the cafeteria line or on the elevator walking down the hall. um, and we don't want to lose that, and so it's been very interesting. we've had to actually talk about why we think there's value in the face to face and in interpersonal interaction in a way that had just been assumed before, and it took us a little while to figure out what that language was. but if we can talk about it, then you can make sure our work to have your staff be intentional to to achieve those benefits and use the time that they have together in in a very direct way. well, I don't want to paint with a broad brush, but but I will. I think that the it's the younger people that B can benefit the most from being in the office, those casual conversations, listening to how a more senior person handles a phone call or handles a Troublesome client or customer or whatever it is, uh, but I think it's the younger folks that are that are sort of feel. the speaker said yesterday that the Young Folks feel they have an, they're entitled to stay home, and so I thought that was a. yeah, I think it's a mix. and the other one, I would add, is the new folks, right. so during the pandemic, we hired 300 people and for two years they worked with us, but they had never been in the room with another employee from their team, right? and so you think about that, like how are they really supposed to truly get a feel for our culture and the way that we engage, interact with people, or or the, the way that we ask a particular question, like I? I know that when I was starting and coming up, you know I would often be in a in a room. uh, the meeting would happen and then, walking out, I would, and walking back to the office, I'd have the conversation like why did you do this? why I was surprised. I answered this way, and that kind of learning is very difficult to have, uh, because if it's a zoom call, everyone just hits, leave the meeting and then you're gone right and and there's no way to go go back and have those sort of conversations. so so it is something that I think we all need to think about now. I'll also say I'd be surprised if we go back to five days a week, because we've also learned that the flexibility and, uh what I've heard from my team a lot is meeting people where you are. I appreciate that you allow me to tailor the work uh to my life uh, and you're trusting that that tailoring will not degrade performance and to to date, that hasn't happened, and so we're going to keep keep trusting our workfor us uh to do the things they need to do. well, I wanted to ask you about two things of affordable housing. I know you're passionate about affordability at the lower end of the income distribution, wealth distribution, but I don't think we have time because I want to make sure I save time for questions, but sure so, with respect to Florida, maybe in the Southeast, Let's, uh, let's go to that question: why don't you give us your thoughts on what you see going on down here? sure, so you know, um, as with Mo, much of the economy, uh, many parts of the country, um, the the economy here is starting to slow down. um, it's not as as hot as it was before. in particular, we and the businesses we talked to, they all have bemoaned the tight labor market, but what they're telling us now is that it's not as tight as it was 6 months and 12 months ago. so there is sort of that moderation happening. uh, I do think Florida has some challenges. it came up in the last panel: this cost of housing. everywhere I go across the state I hear this as a problem. uh, and, and that'll be something, something that that that has to be managed because, um, the dynamic is really going to be about. it all goes back to supply and demand, right, so you know housing prices are going to go up if the demand for housing is greater than the available Supply. the demand here is come from, uh, job growth, continued job growth, but also the net migration that happened. a lot of Northerners have have come down to this state uh with with Deep Pockets that are putting hyper upward pressure on prices as well, and then you have the suppli. so the the last panel was actually quite interesting and I I'll be watching closely to see how, how that live local thing works, because I've not seen that kind of solution in other places. I'm curious to see how that'll play out. yeah, yeah, it was an. it was certainly an interesting panel. so, um, I think we should open up for questions. it's not often we get a Fed president uh on the stage with us, so, um, like Rafael said, he'd be willing and able to take some questions for the audience. thank you very much. that was fascinating. it's a big help and thank you for your work and and service you do. um, you talk. we talk about inflation staying level or staying at 3%. where was it? it's at three now we're going to get to two. so two things. and then we talked about housing being an issue and a problem in Florida and the rise of housing costs. you consider rent in that inflation, but do you consider the cost of buying a new house today and paying the interest payments? is that considered? is that holding a house or a new car, buying a car and paying the higher interest rates- is that counted in your inflation number? uh, sure, double now, it's twice what it was a year and a half ago. yeah, so we, we calculate- I mean we do calculate the all in cost. what, what, what, what? uh, many of these indexes try to do is convert ownership type of expenditures into a rental equivalent right, and so they, they are trying to do that, so that we're we're comparing Apples to Apples in in this. and I'll say: you know the, the dynamic on rents has been uh been interesting and uh, it has been uh stubbornly high. so, um, you know, there are a lot of regularities about, uh, how rents follow home prices, uh, and um, the the, the way that it's shown up in these indices, uh has been slower than people have anticipated. my staff was saying they expected the rental component of these index is to actually contribute to downward pressure a lot more than it has, and so we'll just have to see how that plays out forward, your of Interest. I mean, the cost of carrying a house is double what it was a year and a half ago. oh, yeah, no, I understand, and and because of the rapid rise in interest rates, I think everybody here would agree there's a virtual shutdown. well, let me just apartment development. let me just jump in here and say: also, in Florida, you have an insurance issue here as well. right there, there are lots of components on to the cost of housing that are that get that get brought into this and and so you know there are unique things that happen in every Marketplace. uh, and the, the statisticians, are doing their best to make sure that uh, those things are taken into account as we characterize how these economies are evolving over time. got one hi, good afternoon. my question is about the growing Divergence between the personal SA rate and the cost of debt right now. so credit cards uh averaged over 21% as of the end of last year. um personal loans reached over I think they were 12.4% December of last year. um, we're talking about affordable housing and the cost of rent. uh, wage growth is actually slowing. it's about 50% down over the two-year period ending the end of last year. so my question is: How concerned are you about that Divergence between, you know cost going up and the amount of emergency money that people have uh going forward, especially when? um I think the last number I saw was that 6 and a half% of all credit card debt went 90 days delinquent the end of last year, which was the highest level in a decade. yeah, so Consumer Finance, yeah, oh yeah. no, I understand all of this. look, um, look this. this is an important issue and you know, one of the things that we've tracked through the pandemic is how a family's been managing the high inflationary rates and how, how have they been doing in terms of carrying their debt. and it's been really. I mean, if you talk to any Bankers, they'll tell you, through most of the pandemic, delinquencies on all credit types was incredibly low, like at historically low levels, and what's happened in the last year and a half is that they've all gone up. right, some have gone up faster than others, uh, but they are all still not at levels that you would have expected to see at the height of a recession or anything like that. so so there has been weakening. there has been this normalizing um at at the macro level. now, the other thing that you speak to, which I think is actually quite important- and I say this all the time- like we talk about the economy like it's one economy but no one lives at the 2% growth rate or the 3% growth rate, many people live at 5% and a bunch of other people living at 0%, and so we need to be mindful about the distribution of experiences in the economy, and so we ask questions like that all the time. so I have a group that we do a survey called a worker voices survey, to understand what's happening for people that that are on that, that receive their wages through hourly earnings and and those sorts of experiences, to make sure that we are not forgetting about anybody and really trying to pay attention to those. so we are watching that. uh, one of the things that we've heard in this space is that, um, because of the way the economy has evolved, um, the, there's been a, a, a move to become more entrepreneurial, and so, in the last several years, we've seen more people looking to entrepreneurship, small business operations, as ways to augment their incomes and to try to position themselves in a better way. the last thing I'll just say on this is that you know, I I mentioned earlier that at the height of the pandemic, every family had- pretty much every family had- more income in their, their Bank balances were higher than they were, uh, ordinarily right before the pandemic. that's not true for a lot of families today, right, either they're back to where they were pre pandemic or even they may be a little, a little worse, and that is something that we are continue going to continue to watch and make sure we understand the implications of. I wanted to go back to the um housing question and ask: there are a lot of people that feel, um, the way we measure housing and inflation is terribly lagging and that we survey rers and ask them what their rent was last month and this month and it doesn't hit Market rents and that actually the 9% inflation was probably too low because Market rents had gone up 20 and 30% but they were only hitting one 12th of the population every every month, and that we're at the reverse end of that and we're still catching rent increases. that really happened in the economy 6 months or a year ago and that today rents are flat to in in some cases declining. then that the 3% that we're measuring may actually be too high because housing is such a huge portion of that. do you feel we have a measurement problem and is there any movement to do something about that and move from the the survey method of just what is your rent to trying to measure real Market rents, um, so that's, uh, I had a couple of reactions to that. so, um, one, sure I do. we always worry about measurement error and and actually mismeasurement, uh, as a significant issue. so we do do that. I, I will tell you that, you know I I don't do a lot of the surveys that run these sort of things. actually, I don't do any of them, uh, but I have staff that are engaged with them and talk to the folks at the BLS and other places to try to keep tabs of how they're thinking about it. they're working on new methodologies, uh, continuously to try to improve and speak to some of the issues that you raise. um, a second thing I would say is, um, on some level, we need to also be mindful that if we get mismeasurement, that can be okay if the nature of the mismeasurement is the same all the time. so if we, if we always miss the same way, then the trend you're getting is the actual Trend right and on some level, that can be enough for what you need and and and. so that's another thing to think about moving forward. and the third thing is for the faculty who are here. um, this is ripe area for research, right, this is a place where I think academics can help us uh have a better understanding of, uh, uh, the Dynamics of house prices and and and to the extent there's a Divergence between, uh, the standard way that an index is constructed and the way people actually live in their housing, um, and we can start to unpack that a bit more. uh, that can be very useful as well. I mean, we're not going to do that, well, I'm not going to do that, um, in my role, uh, but, but I think there are some folks that could really probably help us. thank you, um, inflation in in certainly has come down, but there appears to be a a growing difference between that- the rate of growth in goods- and that in Services. what can the FED do to try to control the growth in Services, which doesn't seem to be as vulnerable to higher interest rates? um, so there, so okay, first, there has been this Divergence. so what we've seen in terms of the price Dynamic, uh, for goods, it's come down and, in fact, it's negative uh, in the Aggregate and, historically, Goods inflation has been something around 0 to negative a half, and services inflation is usually in the two to two and a half range, and that's kind of how it plays out. today. service inflation is a bit higher than that um another. so that's that's the Baseline uh to your question. um Services inflation, you usually move slower than Goods. it's always uh a bit stickier in its, in its trajectory, and so the slow pathway on some level is something worth watching but perhaps isn't super surprising. you know, I've always had my Outlook that it would take a while for us to get back to 2% uh, that this was going to be something that would take time to play out. I think some of the Dynamics that we're seeing in Services uh is important for that uh, but your, your, your the question you ask also really kind of answers itself. it mean it says that we cannot afford to ease up uh and uh assume that services will follow a trajectory just because we want it to. we need to make sure that our policy is positioned to help drive it in that direction, and I think where we are today, our current posture, does that quite well. um, I've been saying for a long time we need to hold our rates higher for longer than you would uh ordinarily expect in a cycle like this, and I think the the numbers that we've seen just in the last week with the CPI inflation, with the PC inflation, showing that there is some degree of stubbornness. I think uh validates that perspective and we're just going to have to keep our eye on things to make sure that we we're monitoring appropriately. good good afternoon. um, over here, oh, over here, the. uh, we're all very for forunate and obviously we're feeling some stress here in Florida with insurance and rates and you know the other angst that that comes about. but we're also very blessed we're in a state that has immigration, we have economic growth, Vitality, tourism for the state, six states that you cover. you're probably feeling pretty good relative to some of your counterparts of the other federal reserve banks. can you share with us what it's like to sit in a room with them where maybe they represent parts of the country that don't have what we have? and how do you manage monetary policy on a Countrywide basis where you've got such disparate regions throughout that country? good question, so that's a that's a very good question to to your first point. um, right before the pandemic, we, we, uh, we, we used to do like a formal, published annual report, but then we realized people weren't really printing those out, they weren't really reading them. so we we went to online and the last thing we had in our annual report was: one District, many economies and, uh, what is true across our district, if you look at the geography, if you look at on a map, there are these pockets of intense, powerful, positive economic energy, but then there are large swats that do not have that at all right. so so we always are trying to to sort of navigate and understand how the econom is working by taking all of these disperate experiences and combining together to tell some kind of broader narrative. so that that's uh, so we're doing that even in the sixth district. as a, as a characterization, sitting in the room is amazing and I will tell you that, um, I'll never forget the first time I gave a talk, uh, so every person, they, they speak a couple in a couple rounds. uh, and um, I'm sitting there, Janet Yellen as the chair, and next to her is, uh, uh, Vice chair fiser, who was one of the authors of Dorne Bush and fiser, which was my uh textbook in econ one, uh, and it was: what am I doing here? why am I being asked to speak? uh, and why is anyone going to listen to me? and, um, it was really, it was really quite humbling, uh, because you're in the midst of people who are really smart, uh, they are well trained, uh, they're incredibly thoughtful, uh, and they're really committed to the mission, right, so every person in that room could be doing something else. they could be elsewhere, um, uh, being successful in a lot of different ways, but they've chosen to, to, to do this instead, and so the conversation is really interesting. I actually really have to pay attention to every person, because when I, when I started, my team told me: okay, you can assume that they know all the data. you can assume that they've seen all the stuff you got to figure out what you're going to bring. that's interesting, that that you're going to bring, that's going to actually provide some new color onto the narrative, so that, by the time we get to the end, um, everyone has a a very rich understanding and appreciation of, like, how the economy is. is is playing out, um, in terms of, um, the actual decision about you know, policy, um, there is a degree of abstraction you have to do right, and there's a lot. I mean, this is a huge economy, it's incredibly complex and no one action is going to affect everyone the same, or affect everyone as positively or is negatively. uh, and you just, I mean, I just have to learn to come to terms with that. uh, you've often heard, okay, you all fed Watchers now, right, so, uh, you, you've you've undoubtedly heard people talk about monetary policy as a blunt instrument. right, we get to move one rate and then that's got to flow through to the rest of the economy. how it flows through is going to be be very uneven, both in terms of impact and time. uh, and so, um, it's another reason why I have to be vigilant because, uh, you're never sure. you're never sure exactly when and how these things are going to uh present themselves in the marketplace. I think I think we need to. sorry, but I think we need to end it there. I know you've got a flight to catch and we got- he's got you one more. okay, one more. uh, thank you, I appreciate it. uh. so last year, about a year ago, Philadelphia fed issued a paper on some, a white paper on owner occupied mortgage fraud. that was from 2016 to 2019. I can only imagine in the period after that, uh, through Co and up till now, it's gotten much worse, on top of a lot of just other fraud in the system happening with cryptocurrency and and all kinds of things like that. uh, I know Fanny May subjecting their- you know- originated loans to go under a new review now, so second layer review. so I guess my question is: just what is this on the fed's radar? I mean, obviously the Philadelphia fed has it on their radar somewhat. uh, you guys have some research teams that are looking into things that have happened in the past 2, three years and that's all kind of putting some pressure on inflation, right. so just a general question on: is this on your radar? and and do you guys have teams that are trying to address these different you know fraud in different places? so, um, so I, I wish I had read the paper now. I, I didn't, I, I haven't read it, so I can't speak exactly to what they did or what it means. I, I, I think um is fraud on our radar? yes, and it's on our radar in multiple Dimensions. so one, um, our bank institutions like that eats into their Capital right and it and it puts them it, if it gets to a certain scale, at a level that uh could be threatening to their strategies for resilience and and uh hedging against risk. so, yes, uh, I worry about it just at a baseline level, because I got staff and I have retirees, we have a, we have uh plans that people are are are counting on uh for their livelihoods and how they live, moving forward uh, and that's important um, and we also care about it because, um, there are a whole bunch of regulations around bank seeny and money laundering and the like, which we also need to monitor to make sure that we're in compliance with the law, as well as the institutions that we oversee and regulate uh. more broadly, uh, you mentioned a number of other, like crypto and stuff. those things are not today at scales that would suggest that there is risk to financial stability, um, but they are growing and so, uh, we don't want to be in a position where they get to that scale and we know nothing about them. so we have lots of folks who are looking at these various segments of the marketplace uh, so that, um, as the markets evolve, we're positioned to really understand what's going on on and appreciate uh the implications for those uh those transactions. well, I think we need to end it there. I know people have ples to catch it's Friday afternoon time to get home. but uh, listen, thanks again. great to have you. thank [Applause] you.


