https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YvT85hbzzHI

President Bostic Speaks at the Florida Institute of CFOs

Raphael Bostic,Ira Birns

Florida Institute of CFOs.

Aug 07, 2025

All right, good morning everyone and thank you so much for being here with us today. We're really excited for the um for the program to kick off here. I'm going to keep my opening comments very brief as we begin, but uh just thank you for making the time. We're very excited about this program and and grateful for the Federal Reserve team for making it happen. Uh for those of you that I haven't had the chance to meet, my name is Dustin Taylor and I proudly serve as the executive director with the Florida Institute of CFOs, CFO Exchange Group, and Chief People Group. On behalf of our 450 members around the state of Florida, we'd like to extend our sincere thank you to Dr. Bostik and his team for joining us at such a pivotal time in our economy. It's truly an honor to introduce today's distinguished speakers. Dr. Bostik is the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and serves on the Federal Open Market Committee where he votes every third year. Before moving to the south in 2017, he was a professor at the University of Southern California, an assistant secretary at the US Department of Housing and Urban Development, and an economist at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Raphael, I hope I kept that short enough there for you. Um, on to Ira Burns. I'm pleased to also introduce today's moderator, Ira Burns, CFO and newly appointed president of World Connect Corporation, a Fortune 100 global energy management company headquartered in Miami, Florida. In his dual role, Ira oversees all aspects of the f company's financial operations and now an even greater role in shaping its global strategy. Ira is a longtime friend and advisory board member here with the Florida Institute of CFOs. Today's program consists of about 35 minutes of prepared remarks followed by some interactive uh polling and Q&A. We're really excited for this program and President Bostic. I think you'll be uh happy and I hope hope it brings you a smile that today's session actually marks the largest virtual attendance that we've ever had. It even surpasses when we had the CFO of the NFL on. So uh you're a very popular man and we're excited to dive into today's program. Ira and Raphael, I'll turn it over to you. Well, thanks Dustin. I'll I'll start off. Raphael, thanks so much for for joining all of us and I see all the faces showing up on the screen. Thanks everyone for joining as well. Uh, so I'm going to jump right into questions, but before I do, I was going to mention that I'm actually in London today where I'm sure you may be aware that shortly before this call, the Bank of England reduced interest rates from four and a quarter to 4%. So, I just thought Raphael, I'd just casually bring that up. No pressure at all. I just wanted to make sure you heard that from me. Uh so now we'll jump into some of the questions we've had prepared uh uh for you for today. So I know at my company at World Connect we're seeing a lot of uncertainty in the markets we serve whether it's uh for us aviation, marine or groundbased transportation markets. Uh and this seems to be true across a broad swath of the economy at the moment. In this kind of environment, how do you and your team go about building a coherent macroeconomic outlook? and what what's your short and medium-term view today? >> Well, Ira, first let me just start by saying it's really good to be here and I'm excited to talk with you today and you made this happen and you're on the other side of the pond. This quite quite impressive and uh to Dustin and his team, I just want to thank you all for all that you've done to make this happen. Uh these things don't happen on their own. I when I was at USC as a professor I did a lot of events and uh even though I was standing on stage all the work was done by other people and so just want to thank everyone who's been a part of this to help make this possible. Now um Ira you mentioned uncertainty that has been perhaps the most frequently used word that I've done in 2025. There has just been so many things that have gone on that have made um it difficult to know exactly what's going to be next. Uh and so uh one of the things that we've done in our team is really try to step back a bit and be open to the possibility or the reality that there are a ton of scenarios out there that could play out. Uh and in and as rapidly as things are evolving and changing, it's very difficult to assign probabilities to any of them. So you just have to be open to scenarios. You have to be ready to adapt and adjust quickly. And I think there's a a fair amount of effort that we've been doing on two fronts. One is just to try to figure out uh is there a way to know what's more permanent versus things that are going to be fluid and continue to be fluid. And then the second uh is to really stay focused on who we are, which is we are monitors of the economy. We want to make sure we're understanding how all the key players are responding to the uncertainty. Uh and that's been a key focus for us. So, we've actually redoubled our efforts. We go out and talk to lots more people. We ask more focused questions about how are you doing? Where where do you feel confident about your strategy? Do are you making a three-month strategy? So, you know, several uh months ago, a bunch of the big companies said, "We're not even going to give you a year ahead projection because there's just too much churn going on." um we need to understand all those things because that really sets up uh sets us up really to have a sense about what the trajectory of the economy is going to be. Now you asked about outlooks. Um my outlook right now is for the economy uh to continue its its pace uh of slowing down. It's been slowing down for some time. Um, but I also expect there to be uh some real uncertainty about what that means for labor markets as well as what we're going to look at for inflation. So on the labor side, uh we've been asking folks for a long time what they're expecting to do. And what they've told us is, you know, we're in a in a wait and see pattern. Uh we're not going to hire more people. We're not looking to hire a ton of more people. We're not looking to lay people off either until we have a better sense of the landscape that's under our feet. Uh on the inflation side, uh I do think that uh there is likely to be upward pressure on prices in the next 6 to 12 months. Uh some of this a lot of this has to do with the the trade policy changes that are going on. Um but that puts real pressure on us. So one of the things we're trying to do, one of the things I can I always try to do is be true to the Fed's dual mandate and really ask ourselves and I ask myself and our team, how are we doing relative to the inflation side of the mandate? how are we doing relative to the employment side of the mandate and then tease out the from the answers to those two questions what should we be doing with policy great thanks as you answered that question so well uh there's probably going to be a bit of overlap that I'll try to avoid because you covered a few topics there it is interesting Raphael that you mentioned the word uncertainty as I was preparing for today I asked chat GPT to give me some other words because I found myself using that word over and over again um because obviously >> send me that list when love to have that get off the call. >> Um, so you know, moving over to a tariff related question. Surprise, surprise. Uh, many of us on the call are obviously having heightened levels of concerns in in different ways about tariffs. And I imagine you're getting related questions constantly these days. Uh, one thing we're really trying to understand is whether the impact could be more of a one-time bump in prices or something longerlasting. So, how are you, you and your team thinking that through? And again, this may be a bit of overlap, especially when it comes to the the longer term inflation outlook. >> Well, you know, this is this question about whether tariffs are a one-time thing or whether they're going to be more persistent in their effects and might even cause structural changes, I think is perhaps the most important question that we have today. If you think about econ textbooks, if you were in your econ 101 class, uh the idea of a tariff is that it's a one-time shift and then everybody goes back to doing all the things they were doing before. So, there are no real effects. Uh and importantly that shift happens pretty instantaneously. So you you kind of know exactly what the change is. You know what the magnitude is and there haven't been real changes in anything else that's going on in the economy. In that context, you would expect that to be really a temporary thing. Short run, one-time hit. Nobody takes it on board very seriously. And then in that case, you shouldn't expect uh policy makers to want to have to respond much to it because you're going to be back where you were right before the tariffs anyway. Uh the question that I've been asking our team and I've been asking myself really is um does that textbook model fit today's environment? And I think there are reasons that uh are pretty compelling that suggest that we should be somewhat skeptical about that. You know, the first is just in terms of the speed at which the tariffs are being implemented. This has not been a one-time thing where you wake up on one day and everybody knows what all the tariffs are. Uh, in fact, they changed and the regime has changed uh pretty continuously. I I think we just heard about some new ones proposed just yesterday uh in a whole host of areas that we didn't really have on the radar screen. And so in that context it's unclear really how you would shift that curve because the things are changing all the time. Uh and uh and so that's one thing. The second piece is really about uh how long this is going on. Uh and um you're seeing say for you take India for example that number has bounced around three or four times over the last four or five months. And so if you have business in India, it is hard to know you know upfront you know what the t tariff uh cost is going to be to you and as a consequence it's going to be difficult to build a strategy that you're going to have confidence that will endure over any length of time. Uh and so those sorts of things uh suggest that the episode will last a lot longer than I think you would definitely see in it. It's definitely longer than you'd see in a textbook, but much longer I think than many people might have anticipated uh at the beginning of of this uh these changes. Um we're talking to a lot of businesses right now and we've been asking them sort of how are you thinking about this? How are you making decisions? Couple things have come out pretty clearly. One is that um everyone is reticent to change prices on a rolling basis. They want their changes to happen once, maybe twice, and then be done with it because consumers will not respond to a a continuously evolving environment. Um and so that has caused a lot of businesses just to to pause and say, I'm not going to do anything until I know exactly what's going on uh and where we stand in terms of our cost basis. Um so that's one thing. A second thing is that we're starting to see divergence across some businesses uh in terms of um how they're how they're thinking about this in the sense of there's still uncertainty about where consumers are and how much consumers can take on board in terms of elevated cost. And so we're seeing a a mix of strategies. Some are saying I can't wait anymore. I got to go. Some are saying I can wait a long time so I'm just going to wait. others are somewhere in between and they're trying to to tease some things out. Um all of this has really uh created uh some challenges. I do think the the other thing I worry about uh is that um the more that you have tariffs always on people's minds, the more it just becomes part of people's reality. uh and that higher cost can be uh something that then leads to expectations about where costs will be three months from now, six months from now, 12 months from now uh to be much higher. You know, I I think I'm always reminded about uh previous Fed chair Alan Greenspan when he said, you know, you're winning the battle against inflation when no one is thinking about it. Well, this is kind of the flip side of that. You know, it's on it's on the front page every day. And so people are thinking about this in ways and I I worry about what that means for how uh consumers and businesses will approach their strategies for engaging in the marketplace moving forward. We still have a lot to learn. So I I I want to say nothing is settled but these are the types of things that we're uh definitely paying close attention to and as we learn we will inject that into my views on policy. >> Great. That was very helpful. Um yeah India yesterday was another part of the roller coaster ride. Um, sticking on the tariff topic uh for another moment. Uh, so we're now just starting to see the early signs of tariffs showing up in the June inflation data. What do you think explains the lag and should we expect those effects to accelerate uh in the upcoming months or may it taper off? >> So, you know, you know, it's been very very interesting um the range of views about how quickly tariffs should diffuse into the marketplace. You know, I've seen reports by some who suggest that we've seen all we're going to see. there's nothing more that's going to happen. All the decisions have been made so we don't have to worry about it. Um that's not what I'm hearing from my business contacts and I I think um more and more that we will still be seeing strategic adjustments into 2026 and poss probably well into 2026 as the landscape becomes clearer. Um I do think that um for some businesses there are questions about how long you can wait and I've actually increasingly been talking to businesses who's like okay I kind of have some sense of the range of the possible and one thing that's been quite interesting over the last two months maybe six weeks or so um I've heard and our team has heard just more and more that most business leaders have taken the doomsday scenario off the table that the worst of the worst I don't think is in people's minds about what can likely happen and that I think has contributed to some improvement in people's willingness to take a few steps try some things uh and u create some expectations about what strategies will look like but we still don't know what these final tariffs are going to be for for most businesses uh and that means that everyone is is remaining a bit cautious so I think it's going to be a while yet and I do think that um we've yet to see all the things that will happen. >> Yeah, I agree. I wonder if we'll we'll ever have an end to >> Well, you know, it's funny you asked that. I mean, a lot of folks are saying exactly that, that they they think this is just a new reality and that, you know, on a on a Thursday morning, they could get an announcement that things are changing and that you're just going to have to get used to that. Um, it's a very different mindset and um I think it's it create presents real challenges for for leaders in in basically every sector in the country. I totally agree with that. Um, so moving on, we could I could ask you a lot of questions about tariffs, but you know, I want to cover as many topics as we can in the short time that we have. So I know that at my company at World Connect, while while many parts of our business are still performing quite well, uh, we are nevertheless being extremely cautious about every single high or every capital investment that we consider making. What are you hearing from other business leaders on this topic? how, you know, how are they navigating the current uncertainty in the economy when it comes to thinking about hiring, making capital investments, etc. >> So, the forward-looking approach, I think, is very similar to what you just said, which is um until folks know where the world is, what the rules of the game are. It's hard to we've heard people are not very confident making big bets doing big capital investments and making big changes in how they produce goods or or where they source their products from. You know um one of the things that we have really heard a lot is that um in many regards the underlying fundamentals the foundations of the economy uh are still quite solid. So at the beginning of the year, most folks we talked to were very optimistic about uh the prospects for 2025 and 2026. Uh and then the tariffs came in at levels higher than people expected. And I think it caused everyone to step back and say, okay, I had one mindset, one thing in mind, and now I have something totally different. Uh and so let's think about what a strategy looks like in that context. Um, for for most businesses, what we've heard is that if you've had a a product that was already going, you just kept doing it. And it's the new ones, the big ones that that folks are being uh more hesitant and cautious about. Um, with the doomsday scenario coming off for some, they're like, "Okay, we're going to run." Uh, but that is not a consensus view right now. And, you know, we'll just have to see how that move moves forward. It's this is one of the reasons why my outlook for the economy is for it to continue to slow because we're not seeing the robust engagement that one might have expected uh at the beginning of the year. And we'll we'll just have to see if we get to a point where businesses feel sufficiently confident uh that they're willing to just move forward in a in a very robust way. Um I'm hopeful we'll get clear signs on that in the next couple months. >> Yeah. But the real question, I guess, is what what will create that what what will change that will create that sentiment where people will get more what will have to happen for people to get that comfort level? >> Well, that's a question I'm going to steal that question from you. I mean, we ask it in a lot of different ways, but I mean, I think that is one of the real things like what's going to cause folks to be willing to get off the sidelines and make some pretty significant bets uh to try to drive higher levels of growth. Okay. Um, let's see where we go next. So, we have over 200 executives on this call, a lot of CFOs, uh, all from the state of, uh, Florida, uh, representing companies of all different shapes and sizes, across a wide range of industries as well. So, as a follow-up to what we just talked about, are you seeing any meaningful differences across uh different sectors or company sizes in terms of how businesses are fairing and how they may be thinking and anticipating being impacted by all the craziness around us today? >> Yeah, we're we're starting to see a lot of different strategies and approaches taken. And a lot of it depends on the sector that you're in, the scale that you have, and what your competitors are facing. And so, I I'll talk about each of those. So in terms of um the size uh we're we're getting very clear signals that small businesses are feeling the stress and strain in pretty acute ways. You know small businesses already don't have a lot of extra resources. They don't have um uh diverse supply chains. you know, uh, some research that we've done would suggest that most small businesses, uh, the vast majority have one supplier, uh, and for many of their inputs, and that supplier is often from China or Vietnam. Um, that creates direct exposures in ways that a smaller company just doesn't have the ability, the capability to adjust to very quickly. And so, so we're starting to hear those stresses. Those are the ones the types of businesses that I think are going to be least able to forebear and at some point they're going to have to move prices just to address and reflect the reality of their in their increased cost structure. And that's a that's one one thing. Uh in terms of sector um as I think everyone on on this call knows uh different companies are have very different exposures to international trade. And so if you're in a sector that has a lot of exposure to that trade, um you're feeling the pressures more and you're going to be more likely to have to change your pricing strategies uh at a higher level. So in the surveys that we do uh we're we're we split it out by you know trade related, trade oriented and not and what we see is respondents saying if you're in those sectors you're increasing more your expectations of your price increases are more significant. uh your your expectations about growth are more more more muted and so we've got that as well. Um and then the the other thing that's been quite interesting is uh we we have seen businesses be much more strategic about how they're operating based on what they understand their competitors to be. So, we've done some research that shows through through our survey on some of our survey responses that shows that if you have a business model that is exposed to trade and the tariffs, but you're in a sector where most businesses do not, you're much less likely to respond with price in the marketplace. By contrast, if you flip this around and if you're in a sector that's exposed to tariffs and trade, but your business model is not, you respond as if you're in that tariff regime. And so we're starting to see these kind of other kinds of effects which makes sort of broadlevel macroeconomic forecasting even more complicated because now you've got all these crosses and things that are going on uh that are quite challenging. You know, I I feel fortunate. We have a great team that doing great work to try to make sure that I'm aware of all of the different uh dynamics that are going on. But this spillover thing, the impact of tariffs um on businesses that are not covered by tariffs is something quite interesting. And I think if you look at say US steel prices, um they're up uh relative to where they were. And even though US companies are not cover are not affected by the tariffs because the competitors are. This is this is a classic type of scenario and it's another reasons why why I think that we're we're still we have still yet to see all the price changes that we're going to see and all the upward pressure on pricing. >> Yeah, it's the roller coaster continues. So a good segue is uh jump into consumers. So it's pretty well established that inflation tends to hit lower and moderate income households the hardest. You just mentioned smaller businesses being impacted the most. >> Are you seeing signs that these households are feeling or reacting to current economic uncertainty more acutely than than others? Uh so while we're all business uh executives on this call, we're we're also consumers. Our families are consumers. Uh our friends are consumers. So we're you know we're looking at this from multiple angles. So whatever you could share there would be appreciated. >> For sure. Yeah. I'm a consumer too. So I, you know, I go to the grocery store, I get my eggs, and everybody, like just like everybody else, um, the prices are there, uh, and you just see it. Here's what I would say. Um, you know, we we've been doing framework reviews, uh, for our long run monetary policy statement uh, for many years now. One of the things that we've done is we have a a seminar series called Fed Lessons. And in that series, we routinely ask if it's a choice between inflation, high inflation or a weaker labor market, everyone says get rid of the high inflation. A and so inflation is something that is on everyone's mind. It is incredibly painful. It is real time jarring. So when you are in the store one a week later and the prices are different, you notice that that stays in your head and it has a real impact on folks. um that that is certainly true for lower income consumers. Uh and what what we've seen for them is uh the stresses for low-inccome consumers have been building uh from the sort of the the the height of the the pandemic when we had all those supports, you know, the $1,400 check and all the those sort of things. Um for those families, uh that extra money has been spent, right? So they are very much in stress and we're starting to see all manner of strategies that they're using to try to stretch their money going from, you know, label goods to the generics in stores. Uh using um uh dishwashing liquid instead or dishwasher liquid or or in the in the the washing machine um using liquid or powder instead of the pods because you can ration those things. and we're starting to see all of those uh that those choices being made. Um I don't know that it's gotten harder for them in the sense that once you start in that space, you're in that space. Uh but but we are definitely seeing stresses. I think the larger question though is how does the consumer more broadly and more generally respond if they start to see higher prices? because, you know, when we had the first episode of of elevated inflation, consumers had not really seen that for quite some time and they had very strong balance sheets. Um, now we're having a potentially a second period where prices are going to go up at a high level. Uh, but we've already just been through one where a lot of balance sheets have been weakened a bit and so we don't know sort of where folks are going to how they're going to respond or where they will turn to to buy their products and goods. uh and that will be one of the things that we'll really have to try to resolve as we uh as we look forward to how the economy moves uh and how businesses respond and react. >> By the way, when you're the consumer and going to the grocery store and you're having a hard time getting a good deal on eggs, just let me know because I have I have a farm in South Florida, so I could >> We should have We should have been talking two weeks ago when I had my family visiting. >> Oh, there you go. Call me anytime. So last week's labor report seemed to surprise just about everyone and well as we know upset a few people as well. What what's your read on what's actually happening in the labor market right now and how do you see it evolving over the next 12 to 18 months? >> Well, you know, I I was on TV last week just I think an hour after those things came out and it was it was a surprise to everyone. It's definitely something that everyone's speaking to. I think for me the biggest uh eye-opening aspect of that data report were the revisions for the previous two months. Like I I kind of expected things to slow down. Uh those revisions were quite large and I think it really uh reflects some of the the churn and the turbulence uh in the economy. It's just very hard to get get a clear signal on this. I'll say the other the other thing I'll say is um my district I think the southeast has actually been perhaps stronger than other parts of the country. Uh and so as we've been going around, we've not been getting signs that of the slowdown being that dramatic. Uh and so one of the things that we will uh be looking to is uh in the next several weeks is to try to unpack this and really understand uh what this means. How should we be thinking about the next revision set of revisions on the numbers? Uh and also really uh really test with with you the you leaders in business about what you're seeing and and whether the numbers that came out over the last 3 months match what your experiences or whether it's something actually quite different. Um that'll be uh an important thing for me. I think it it really did cause me to think uh differently, a little differently about how well we're doing relative to our maximum employment mandate. Now, I said at the very beginning, we have two two mandates. Inflation has been high. It's actually been uh we haven't been at our 2% target for more than four years. That's a long time and that's a problem. Uh and for most of that time, the employment mandate has basically been at full employment, as good as you would hope it to be. Um the BLS numbers last week really raised a question as as to whether we're still at full employment or whether we're moving away from it in a way that should mean that those risks the risks to our two mandates are much more imbalance as opposed to it being inflation is a big risk and employment is not right now. And that's the thing that um that me and my team will really be uh having I'll call them discussions. It'll be more like arguments about uh in the next uh few weeks leading up to the meeting in September. Not to be political in any way, but the revisions that you know that came through, does that trouble you in any way? I mean, what what's your read on that? Is that a new trend? Is it a one-time thing or, you know, how would you how would you comment on that? >> So, I say a couple things. So one um when I was a professor one of the last projects I started before I came on this job was to look at revisions and to understand uh how revisions evolve and and whether revisions to data affect people's perceptions of the marketplace. So revisions in and of themselves are not a new thing. They're something that happens all the time and it's it's part of actually doing good statistical work to to always be trying to refine. So the the fact that there were revisions wasn't that troubling to me. The fact that they were large was surprising. But as we've been saying, ton of uncertainty today, lots of things that have happened that we've never seen in our lifetimes. So the idea that that the standard approaches to collecting data might not capture all the things that are going on is not a huge surprise. And and so I think one of the things that we should always be trying to do though is learn lessons from this and see if we can evolve our processes to be more on point. But that's very difficult to do in real time. And so I you know I I take my hat off to all the economists and the folks at the BLS who are doing the work on this. This is a really hard period. Uh, and I'm hopeful that the events that have happened and a lot of the the commentary uh, doesn't undermine people's confidence in what they're doing. They work super hard. I talked to a lot of them. Uh, I have the greatest respect for the work that they do and it's really in all of our interests that they continue to do their work in a way that allows them to produce the highest quality uh, the most accurate data possible and and uh, we will definitely support them in anything that they need. >> I completely agree with you on that. their job is a lot more difficult today probably than it ever has been. Um so financial markets uh you know jumping to another topic uh what what's your read on the financial markets right now? It seems that up until now markets have taken a lot of I use the word again on this uncertain stride uh at least to some degree. Uh do you do you agree with that and looking ahead do you think that resilience continues or is there something in your view that could start to crack the foundation more meaningfully? So you know I I get lots of questions on this and you know the first thing I try to remind people is that um the markets financial markets are not our mandate. Our mandate is employment and stable prices. So I spend much more time focused on that. I will say it's been surprising to me how markets have been evolving. Um, and in spite of a pretty significant shift in the cost basis for doing business, uh, the markets seem to have sort of shrugged that off. Um, I've honestly asked others sort of why they think that is and what they're thinking, uh, and and how it should be interpreted. Uh what I've been told is that uh the markets feel like uh they know the range of where these jars are going to land and it's in a level or in a style that they can handle and that businesses can handle. But you know that's just speculation on the on on on on all of our part. Um I think this is a good cocktail party conversation to be honest uh to try to discern sort of what the the decisions or how the decisions of millions of people all come together to make a statement. It's it's quite difficult. Um but I do think that in this environment for me I'm expecting that um the the volatility that we will see in pretty much everything is heightened and so it would not surprise me to see swings in equity markets. I don't have any predictions on what what'll trigger it or what that will look like, but because there's just so much that's unknown, um so many data points that are coming in, um it's really difficult to uh to describe the psychology of a of a financial market. Um it's I mean, I'm a psych major. I was a psych major with econ. Um so I know people are super complicated. Uh and then you bring them all together in the marketplace. uh the complicated gets even more complicated. >> Yeah. The law of exponential complication, I suppose, right? And you know, not not to uh continue on that same path, but just a moment longer in listening to everything you've said so far, we earlier we talked about the fact that the the small smaller businesses are the ones that seem to be worried more. larger players in the financial markets seem to have a different view because their egos are bigger and they're maybe more confident that uh that the world's going to be a better place. They're maybe there's more, you know, educational background. They live through it many times. So, it is there's a bit of a dichotomy, right? Because it seems like big business is kind of okay. Small business is getting more worried every day. >> Well, you know, I think big businesses just have more buffer resources, right? So if things happen, they have the ability to shift workforces in bigger ways. They have a bigger uh capital stack that they can tap into. Um they actually have more relationships out there that they can then use to get information and then respond quickly. So I do think they have some structural advantages which allow them to weather things uh more readily. Uh the the question though is uh being able to parry and manage is different than really being able to um just avoid and and totally absorb. And so we'll just have to see how that plays out. actually want to say one other thing on tariffs while while I'm thinking about it which is um the the other thing that about these tariffs which I think is actually quite interesting and I think we all need to reflect on is the fact that these tariffs are actually designed to change people's and businesses supply chains they're designed to actually lead to structural enduring changes in how businesses operate and if that is the case then I don't think that these tariffs are likely to be something that you should look through because they're inducing structural al changes and if there are structural changes that happen then you would expect there to be structural changes or fundamental changes in the dynamics of inflation and employment and all those other things. So I think one other question that we all need to have in mind is to what extent do we think that these tariffs are likely to succeed in driving that structural change because if that does then it means the impacts are going to be far more permanent. >> Great point. Uh, I've got a couple more before we go to the poll and and some questions from uh, everyone on the call. So, I won't I won't ask you to directly comment on the new federal fiscal package or as it's been called, one big beautiful bill. Though, as always, beauty is in the eye of the beholder or maybe in this case it's the debt holder. Uh, my attempt at financial humor. Um, with that said, with the debt ceiling being increased as part of it, how, if at all, does that affect the Fed's balance sheet or your approach to balance sheet management going forward? Well, you know, uh, balance sheet management is really about trying to make sure there's a lot of liquidity so that markets function. And, you know, the debt will divert resources out of liquidity, some liquidity segments to others and really to to try to to fund and finance that debt. And so, we'll have to watch what what's happening in that space. You know, we've been over the last several years reducing the size of our balance sheet, trying to move it out of an emergency posture into one that's sort of more ordinary and sustained. And we've made tremendous progress on that. And I I think, you know, I've had been in many settings where people had doubts that we would do it. Uh and I I've been really pleased about the amount of progress that we've made on that. So, we'll have to think about that. Um so we're going to watch and you know we've not ever seen a period where uh the US central bank has tried to reduce its balance sheet so dramatically. Uh and so we're getting to a territory where um it's where you may be at a point where we reduce it beyond the p the point that markets can function from a liquidity perspective. And so we're watching that very carefully. We've developed some new uh metrics to try to assess how much liquidity is in the marketplace and we'll just be watching over the next several months as the Treasury issuances play out to see how reserves evolve uh and to try to get a sense of of how much liquidity there is. Um but again I think people should not think that any adjustments that we make reflect uh a lack of conf lack of certainty or commitment to getting us back to a more normal posture with our balance sheet. That's essential. We need the US economy to stand on its own uh and uh us move into the background just to make sure that things function. >> Great. Thanks for that as well. So my last question uh so I know you share your latest thoughts on rates last Friday and for the audience you said with new information it's appropriate to rethink everything and that's what I will be doing with my team. Um so that's what that's what you said last Friday any early updates on such rethinking six days later that you may want to I had a question that everyone was dying to hear an answer to. >> Oh no no no. So no I I'm fully expecting that. So here's what I would say. I've been for most of this year on one cut for the year. Today I'm still on that. Uh I fortunately have five weeks I think five or six weeks before the next meeting. We're actually going to get a lot of data uh around inflation around what's happening in terms of employment. Um that will allow me to think about um how do the the relative balance of risks between inflation and employment. Um the employment number did say that the risk and employment side is much higher than it had been in my mind going into the meeting uh last week. Uh and so I will definitely be looking carefully on that. uh and and actually listening to a lot of folks, a lot of business leaders, a lot of my colleagues around what they're seeing uh so that we collectively have the right view about where the economy is, how it's functioning, so that we can get to a policy that makes the most sense for uh for where we are today, >> next year. Any comments on next year >> uh in terms of our policy posture? So, I'm hopeful that um we get through the elevated pricing pressures um in an orderly and and quick way so that we can actually start to return our policy rate to neutral. I think my outlook today is that we're going to get there next year uh probably to the middle to the later part of it. Uh but a lot of there's so much moving there are so many moving parts uh that it's hard to have a lot of confidence on that. You know, I I've actually started asking folks when I you give in person talks like, "How many of you had a plan at the beginning of the year? Is it the same plan that you have today? Do you think it'll be the same plan that you have three months from now?" And no hands go up on the last one. It's it's become very very difficult to forecast. Uh so you know I'm just going to keep my eyes open, keep my head down and try to make sure that uh that I notice the turns and trends uh sufficiently fast that uh that I can adapt my policy strategy for that. >> Thanks. Really appreciate all of your candid answers. I think now we're going to jump to the polling questions. Dustin, is that right? >> Yeah, that's right. Ira, thank you guys so much for that. Um, President Bostik, I also wanted to give you the opportunity to share a little bit more information about your CFO survey and the data collection process at the Fed. >> Well, sure. You know, I I mentioned a lot today about how we talk to lots of folks. We try to get a lot of information from people. Um, we do this one, we have a bunch of people who do one-on-one conversations, but we've actually built up a pretty significant uh survey center here. And one of the surveys that we run is a survey of CFOs. We do this in concert with the Richmond Fed and folks at Duke University. And um we just call survey. We we try to get CFOs to give us pictures about what they're seeing. So if you want to participate in the survey, if you want to be a respondent, uh you have the QR code there. Please do click on that, let us know. We're always looking to to fill in our our respondent base so that we cover all the sectors, all sizes, all industries. uh it is a national survey. Uh so Florida is super important for us. So I really encourage you to do that and become part of uh the way that we learn about what's happening in the economy so that we make better policy moving forward. >> Excellent. Thank you, Raphael. And I'm actually now going to turn it over to Ann, our managing director, to deploy some live audience polls. >> All right. Good morning, everyone. Um and so, uh you should see some polls showing up on your screen here. This adds a little bit of interactivity to this virtual program, but also for our members who uh want to receive CPE for uh through NASBA or for our uh HR professionals that want to receive PDC's through SHERM. These polling questions are required. Um so please scroll down. There's four questions you should see on our screen. I'm going to I'm going to read through the options because we do have people that are joining over the phone. So question one, over the next 12 months, how do you expect your domestic employee headcount to change? And we have options that go all the way from um increasing from, you know, zero, 5%, 10%, more than that, no change, or decreasing by less than 5%, 5 to 10, or more than 10%. Question two is, how have economic and policy uncertainties affected your investment plans over the next 12 months? Um, respondent answers are, are they increasing? Are you maintaining? Are you delaying investments? Or are you scaling back any planned investments? Question number three is, how do you expect tariffs to improve pricing over the next 12 months? Are you expecting no impact, slight increase, moderate increase, significant increase, or are you expecting decreases? Uh, and finally, question number four. Over the last 90 days, what trends are you seeing in customer uh behavior? I know this is this is one that Dr. Vostic enjoys that we've heard. So, are you seeing that um your customers are paying more quickly? They're doing prompt payments. Are you seeing predictable timing? So, there's no real change. Um, or are you seeing there's prolonged terms or even delinquent payments um coming through? And I'm going to uh I'm going to go ahead and close the poll so we can get a quick little look at the results here. Um, and so you should see the results on your screen now, but you know, Ira, I know you wanted to take a take a look at this and go into um go into maybe some immediate thoughts. Dustin, I'll bring you into the conversation as well. You know, it definitely looks like um with the first question of domestic uh employee headcount, in total about 50% of respondents either said no change or less than a 5% change. So that's that's pretty small. I'll I'll hand it back over so you guys can go through the >> certainly certainly positive. Raphael, I assume you could see the the results on your screen. >> So I'm not actually seeing them very well. They're they're kind of at distance. Um so if you could just summarize them, that would be great. >> You want me? >> Go ahead, Ira. Yeah. So, the way I group it, I would say 50% of the folks that responded said no change to a increase of less than 5%. Um, and decreases by, you know, anywhere from, you know, 0 to 10% were only 24% of the group. Um, and then there was a small part of the group actually was pretty impressive that said their headcount is they're looking to increase their headcount by greater than 10%. That was 8%. But, you know, h half of the group uh is arguably stable to positive and then 25% assumed um a decline. Mo most of that that 25% was less than 5%. Yeah. So, that's um that's actually very consistent with what we've been hearing. Slight upward bias in the the hiring expectations, but not gang busters uh by any stretch. because we know that there are some sectors such as housing and home building where there have really struggled. Um there there are businesses that are reporting that they're having really diff real difficulties. It's very consistent. I think the thing that that will be interesting moving forward is um how the percentages evolve. Do they stay at this 5025 split or do they uh move much more into like a 3535 split? Um that would really signal something significant. Great. Uh the next question was on um investment plans over the next 12 months. So 72% well 64 out of that 72 said maintain current. A small percentage uh said they plan on increasing their investment plans and then about a third a little less than a third are uh are looking to uh either delay or scale back. And so this is also quite consistent. Um you know the hold uh is is the is the plague that we're hearing from everybody. Uh and uh the scale back. It it'd be interesting to know um are these are people seeing these as big projects or are they just holding on everything? Uh such that you know some of the maintenance things are not going on as well. But uh but this is actually quite consistent as well that um you know folks are not really projecting uh and the respondents here are not projecting a huge amount of widespread distress which I think is is actually quite interesting and and and reflects a comfort with kind of the status quo and where we are >> because the state of Florida is so amazing. I think that's why these answers >> exactly and >> on tariffs um again the question is how do you expect tariffs to impact pricing over the next 12 months 43% answered a moderate 3 to 5% increase another 26% said slight increase of 1 to2 so you know 70% uh uh said they expect prices to increase uh and then 16% uh uh suggested a significant increase 6% or um only 14% responded no impact. So it was either uh the the number one answer was moderate and then you know there were two camps some a little lower some a little higher. >> So that's actually very interesting. You know our our target is two right? So if it looks like what uh almost 60% are three or more. Um so that's the upward pressure that that we were talking about earlier. And I think um the qu the two questions that that would follow on to this is um all right if that's 12 months where are you the next 12 months like do you think this is something where you're going to continue at these elevated levels uh and um and then the second is handicapping this like you had to put a probability so we've started doing this say okay we're going to give you three scenarios put a probability on the three of them to see so what I think most people have done what they think is most likely, but is the second most likely the 1% or is it the 6%. Right? And those are the things that I think can provide some interesting nuance. The sort of things that we ask in our surveys actually to try to really understand the um the breadth of the pressure. >> You know, you you and I have had dinner together with a group of CFOs a couple times and you always ask the following question from what I remember, which is, have you seen trends in customer payment patterns? I remember we had that >> and there was somebody there that isn't on this call that had a really >> scary answer at the time that both doubted. I don't know if you remember that session but so uh today um 63% of the of the group said they're not seeing any uh any changes which is good. I think that was I know that was my answer. Uh, I was actually surprised to see that 30% said they're seeing either prolonged terms or slower payments or, you know, extended timelines. Um, I don't know if that's consistent with what you've been seeing. >> Well, you know, I I think it's um it is consistent with the idea that stress is emerging for stress emerging and is real for a number of folks. You know I you if you think about the prolonged terms we have been hearing that uh some subcontractors some suppliers are asking for for changes like if uh in terms of repayment because there's the churn on things uh so so that is not 100% I think 30% suggest that there is some migration in that right now uh upward um which could be concerning and something that we'll just have to keep keep an eye on uh the the no change actually for me seems uh pretty on point in the sense that we've not seen in the aggregate numbers a lot of big moves in the pricing right folks have been using forbearance strategies folks have been trying to find other ways to cut costs that don't show up in prices um so those things I think might mute the need to respond with different changes in terms um but we what we've been hearing is for many businesses they're kind of almost at the end of the line for how those forbearance strategies can play out and so they'll have to make some other decisions moving forward. So, um this is another one like if for for the for your group um you might do this poll like the next three or four times you guys get together just to see how things evolve because um that is real information. You know, one thing I I try to tell folks is in these type of settings and these environments, uh the decisions you're making are the economy. So talk to each other, pay attention to each other, uh because there is learning that happens when you uh start to see or hear trends from the people among you. You all are the leaders of business across the state uh and and play an important role in how our economy evolves moving forward. >> Dustin, when Raphael said that, I was going to say the same thing. We do surveys regularly. We should definitely keep asking that question and if that number changes uh we should send the information to uh to this gentleman. >> Yeah, you need to call me right away. Call me right away. Exactly. Right. >> Absolutely. >> Have some questions from the group now. Right, Dustin? >> Absolutely. So, I'll jump in here just to field a couple of these. We've got about 10 minutes left and I know one that comes up very frequently is around Fed independence and David Kite asked the question around does the current political environment affect how you make decisions? Are you able to remain independent? >> So, um, what I'd say this is yes, I am. Um, my job is really to, uh, try to hit make sure that the economy performs in ways that are consistent with full employment and maximum price stability. Um, and that means that our horizon is different than the horizon of many others out in the world. uh and you know from the very first days of me in this job uh I would turn on the TV and people would be griping about things that we were doing complaining having different views and that's really just part of the territory. So for me I I really do just try to keep my head down keep perspective understand that central bankers are often in positions that are not the most popular but are the right places to be for what our charge is. And um that's kind of how I'm going to approach it. and and you know I talked to my colleagues on this. We are all in the same mindset. Um it's the job that we have and uh that's what we're going to just keep doing. >> Thank you very much for that. Another one from one of our board members in Tampa. The last FOMC meeting was the first dual dissenting votes in over 30 years. As business leaders, we are accustomed to occasional disagreements in the boardroom. Uh is this something you anticipate will continue in upcoming FOMC meetings? So I actually it would not surprise me in the sense that this is a really complicated time and there are so many different scenarios that could play out and a lot of what folks are doing what I'm doing is really trying to say okay which one do I think is most likely which one do I think is second most likely how do I do probabilities and to the extent that my my colleagues put different weights on things it will point to different uh uh policy prescriptions that make sense and because there are so many moving parts I think it's actually much harder now to do policy than it was 12 months ago where inflation was really in a hard place and we we clearly need to do that. Now you're seeing a lot of churn uh the risks to the mandates are moving and they're fluid and so it's it doesn't surprise me that people wind up in different places. You know one thing I will say though is even with the dissands um it it's a thoughtful conversation. It's an engaged conversation. I learn things from my colleagues even when I've land in a different place than they do. And I think it's a it's for me it's a it's a sign that that everyone should know that we are taking this seriously and we are really sticking to our guns. We we have a view about the world and our job is to try to be as persuasive and compelling as possible. Um because when you hear it that way um when I get to the end of the meeting I kind of feel comfortable with where the committee ultimately winds up. >> Absolutely. That's great. Um, I know one topic that has continually been brought up across all of our executive communities is around AI. So, I'd be curious to hear your thoughts and how the Federal Reserve is thinking about AI and its impacts on labor productivity, wages, potential job displacement across many sectors. Um, does the Fed see AI as deflationary as a deflationary force? >> All right, so I'm going to hold on the last question, the last part of that question, and just start with the first. You know, we've been asking about AI in our surveys for the better part of three or four years. And until about four months ago, what businesses were telling us was, "Yeah, we we're dabbling in it. We have it in a sandbox over here. It's not really in our business processes. It's not really material to how we're doing things." Uh, in the last couple of months, that has changed. And I'm hearing much more from businesses. Oh, yeah. We figured this out. We have a couple things that we're going to do right now that we think are going to enhance the productivity of our workforce. uh and we're going to run hard on it. Uh what what businesses have been less uh explicit or clear on is the implications for the needed level of employment uh and uh whether they will uh continue to deploy these in uh really intensive ways. So I'm not hearing as a general matter that that folks are expecting they're going to lay off like 30% of their staff because they have uh some artificial intelligence. But we are hearing that folks do believe this productivity increase is going to be material uh and it could reduce costs. Um now the the other piece and you know I'll just say for me one of the things that is uh quite interesting about this uh this technology is that it is disrupting as you alluded to parts of the economy that have not historically been disrupted by new technologies. Typically, the new technology disrupts the jobs that have the least specialized skill, like the stuff at the bottom that you can replicate. This technology is actually going to disrupt uh job categories for people that actually had to go through a lot of education, a lot of training, a lot of specialization. That's quite different than I think what we've seen. And it'll be interesting to see what the response to that is at large as we think about um having to retrain people to be positioned to be competitive for the jobs of tomorrow. I think it's it's a major challenge that we are going to face and and one that um I think merits a lot more conversation than what's happening today. >> That's that's great. You know, the closing question I would have is another one of our board members in South Florida is Mark Kempa, the CFO of Norwegian Cruise Line. Um, you may have seen the interview recently from PayPal's CEO who highlighted the tremendous growth that they've seen in buy now pay later uh usage among the younger consumers. How is the Fed evaluating the expansion of buy now pay later and similar credit tools? And is it seen as a financial stability risk or more of a signal on consumer sentiment and liquidity? >> All right. So, I'm going to say I'm conservative and I'm cheap, right? So, I don't I don't like to do things where I don't think I can pay it back. And I do think that, you know, the pay later for me, and this is just personal, right? That is one where you're you're taking a risk that you're going to have the money down the road. So, to me, it's it's more a sign that um folks are feeling more stretched uh and that they're having to to rely on strategies uh that may or may not play out moving for in the future. And so uh that to me is a source of concern. Now it may be everyone is able to pay it back, right? So, I'm not I'm not making any judgment on sort of the outcome of the transaction, but that choice does say something about where families see their balance sheets uh in ways that suggest that um we need to unpack this more, be uh dive more into it and really have a clear sense about the extent of uh of uh discomfort or stress that people are having to do things. Um, yeah, it's it's just uh it's not something that I I do, but you know, there are a lot of things I the folks here will tell you I'm the last person to do every technology. It always breaks down for me. I like I'm I'm happy to be late. So, um on on that stuff. So, so I would just say this. Um the consumer is a big question mark right now in the sense of we we don't know how consumers are going to respond in the environment that we're in today. Uh and uh it's something that everybody needs to be mindful of and it goes back to what Iron and I were just saying. If you see big changes and things happening that are not close to what you expected, those are things that we really need to know uh in real time because that that will be real information that something is happening that we really need to do a deep dive in and understand. >> That's great. And President Bostik, I want to close with um another slide to share that you might share about the weekly digest that your organization provides as well. >> Yeah. So, you know, we do I got a great team. We have a lot of tools. We have a lot of data things. We do a lot of papers and we actually try to do them in ways that are accessible to regular people. So, you don't need a PhD or any of that kind of stuff. And it's we do it for you for the public. So, please subscribe to us. We have a a weekly digest that tells you the things that that we think are interesting and then you'll know all the things that we do so that when next time you see me uh when I talk it won't be a surprise. It'll be uh Yep. That's exactly what I expected. So, so please do part of join our family and I really do enjoy talking to you and doing these sorts of things all the time. >> Excellent. Well, I know we talked about this earlier on the call before everyone joined, and I believe there's an FOMC meeting on these exact dates, but uh for everyone on the line, this is uh our 2026 CFO summit that's taking place at the Breakers in Palm Beach. Um we're very excited to uh have everyone out for that event next year. And Bostic, if you can get the crew to move the FOMC meeting to the Breakers, we'd love to have you. >> Well, I'll call Jay and see what he has to say about that. We'll call Jay and then have Jay call Darren who's the CFO. >> All right. There you go. That's right. >> And lastly, uh coming up very soon, our CP CPG retreat in Orlando on September 11th and 12th. If you're in the state of Florida, you're a lot of CHRO's on the line today or if your CHRO wants to join a community with peers, please reach out. Thank you all very much for making the time to be here with us today. We are grateful for your attendance and we're really grateful for the insights on behalf of the Federal Reserve. Thank you, Rafael. Raphael, >> thanks again. >> This has been a lot of fun. >> Lot of fun.
