https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w4vfiilY7Ug

President Bostic Speaks at MNI Connect

Raphael Bostic

Market News International's Connect event in London

Jun 30, 2025

Good afternoon everyone. I'm Jean Young um senior Fed correspondent for M&I. Welcome to M&I Connect and to our guests um online as well. Uh, and a very big welcome to our distinguished guest, Raphael Bostik, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and member of the FOMC. Uh, we're live streaming from London, just a short walk away from the M&I headquarters. Um, and at M&I, we aim to cover everything that matters to markets. Right at the top of the agenda as we go into the second half of the year is the reaction to President Trump's trade war. We're currently at the tail end of a 90-day ceasefire on his Liberation Day tariffs, which if resumed next month would bring the average tariff rate for the US to over 25% from the current 17%, which is already the highest in almost a century. After the massive volatility witnessed in the spring, with many economists fearing a recession, markets are now shifting toward a more benign view of how events will unfold. With the US stock market posting record highs last week, are they right? With lower growth and higher prices still in the forecast and the sources of uncertainty still unresolved, we're delighted to have Raphael here with us today to weigh in on all of this. Uh Raphael took the top job at the Atlanta Fed in 2017, returning to the institution where he started his career as a senior economist at the board of governors in Washington in the late 90s. In between, he pursued a career in academia and public service focused on housing and community development at the University of Southern California, also my own alma mater. Right? and assistant secretary of policy development and research at the de uh department of housing and urban development under President Obama. He's a graduate of Harvard and took his PhD in economics at Stanford. Okay. Before we begin, um I'll mention the format. We'll run for about an hour. Everything is on the record. We'll start with a couple questions from me. Then I'll bring in our M&I Connect guests here and invite Raphael to respond. Um, please raise your hand so I can see you around the room. Um, and I should say that Raphael has expressed to me he's he's just as interested in hearing your thoughts as much as I'm sure you're keen to hear his thoughts. Okay. So, how are you doing today? I'm doing well now that I got here. It's uh it's warm and I understand walking is better than trying to do the the cars. So, uh I'm doing London. It's all good. Good. Good. Good. All right. So, uh, this this whole year seems we've been waiting for data to show higher inflation and slower growth. Um, but so far the effects on the US economy have been less bad than feared. Uh, why do you think that is? And who's paying for the tariffs if not the US consumer? So, thank you for for hosting me. It's good to see you all. Thank you for being here and thanks all of you online for being here as well. Um there are a couple answers to wait a couple of pieces to the answer to this question. I think the first is uh you know the tariffs have been signaled for quite some time before any were announced or put into effect and when we talked to business leaders and you know I've talked to a number of them they all said we know we knew they were coming so we wanted to try to take steps as much as possible to push off when we would have to make decisions about changing prices. So frontload a lot of of buying of of inputs and goods. Um so they had inventories that could last for some time over the course of um the initial establishment of the tariffs moving forward. And so that that played out over a long period of time and I think businesses I'll say for me I think businesses turned out to be more effective at that and at forest stalling uh the need to uh respond to to tariffs. So a lot of of the products that have received tariffs are not the ones that consumers have been facing to date. So that that's been been one piece. I think a second piece is that um there's still a lot of uncertainty about uh sort of where this is all going to go. So uh I think a lot of businesses were expecting there to be uh tariffs this year. um they didn't know exactly what they were going to look like, how big they were going to be, what they were going to cover, all those sorts of things. Uh and today, I think there's still a good deal of uh uncertainty on the part of businesses about the answer to any of those questions. Right. So you mentioned we're uh coming to the end of a pause period, but there already signals that there's going to be an extension of a bunch of those that the Treasury Secretary and others uh have have made to suggest that we're not going to have clarity in a week or two weeks. This is still going to take some time uh before we'll we'll sort of know the answer to those sorts of things. Um and so uh when we've talked to business there are really three strategies I think of that businesses like everyone everyone's doing their own thing but I've been trying to bucket them into three categories. I think one category is uh companies that are just saying okay we can wait this out as long as we can and we not we don't want to be moving prices uh over repeated period of sequences or repeated sequence uh and um they tend to be larger companies that have some scale that have some resilience and resources to be able to manage that and those time right it'll take a while for all these businesses to figure out exactly where they're end point is uh and um you know by some estimates you know this could this could stretch into 2026 before businesses do all the things they're going to do and respond to these and that assumes that um the tariff situation is not extended even further uh moving forward u and then the second is that um I think the one implication further implication of this is that what what we will see with prices is such a more continuous evol olution over time as opposed to the textbook story of tariffs which is a one-time step up. Right? So if you if you know your your basics of economic tariff supposed to be a shift of the curve two hours you're done and then we move on. Um this doesn't look like it's going to be like a step like that. It be much more incremental over time and we'll have to see sort of what that means for overarching inflation dynamics. Right. Does does that mean that um the inflation we might see is a little bit more persistent in nature or it could be. So um the one thing that um I I I hearken to is uh you know that you're you've done your job on a various on whatever you're doing if no one's talking about it. Right? So if no one's talking about inflation then inflation clearly isn't an issue. If no one's talking about uh power, then the electric company's doing what the electric company's supposed to do. It's only when you have issues uh and concerns that people will be talking about it. And so to the extent that inflation is something that stays on the front pages uh because this upward pressure dynamic is still present um there is a risk that it seeps into uh the psyche of the consumer and the business leader uh and could eventually lead to changes in um in their strategies much more structurally. That remains an open question though and you know we are um just in the middle of this right now and it it will be interesting uh we'll be watching closely to see both how consumers and how businesses respond uh as this extends further on into the future. So last week we got some pretty downbeat um consumer spending data and uh over the course of the last couple of months first quarter GDP data has been revised lower uh driven primarily by um consumption numbers. The May personal spending and income numbers were also much worse than expected. Um do you think tariffs are having kind of this uh weakening are weakening the economy more so than it is um raising prices at this point? So that's hard to say. Um on one hand I would say uh everyone expected some slowdown uh because uh a lot of consumers were trying to beat the tariffs and we knew that there was a fair amount of upfront spending that was going to be present. That's one of the reasons why we saw so much importing in the first quarter. Um so so there was always going to be that dip coming after that and and so um on one level that's something just to keep in mind. Now the question is like how big of a dip should you expect it? Lots of different views on that. Uh and we'll have to see. I I'm actually uh interested to see whether that's a one-time blip in May or whether this is the beginning of something that looks more like a trend. We we will uh we will see. I also think that a lot of this was not about the tariffs like uh because much of the tariff pricing has not actually made it into the marketplace yet and so uh so that response is still yet to come. What do you think it's about then if not the tariffs? Oh I I think it's about two things. So one I think there was some pulling forward of consumption. Uh and then the second is um uncertainty causes everyone to go a little slower. take your time, step back, and um and wait and see. I mean, to the extent that you can uh you you you will I I've been using the analogy of driving in fog, uh when the fog gets gets thicker, everyone slows down or they pull over, right? And so, in that instant, in that context, you would expect to see some um degradation of energy, if you will, in the marketplace. And I I think that's another part of what we've seen. Um turning toward the Fed's reaction to all this, like you said, you guys have been on hold uh while watching the data develop. Um for now, it seems the inflation uh rise might be coming later than expected. Does that mean a push back of any judgment on when to resume normalization for rates? Well, I I won't speak for the whole committee. I'll let my colleagues do that on their own, but I would say um I like to move in a direction when I know which direction to move in and um that would for me require more information than we have today. Um I definitely want to have some sense of of what the um how the increase pressure and pricing will play out in the marketplace. uh I'll want to know how consumers respond to the extent that prices change in any regard. Um and I I'll also want to know sort of what's happening in a whole host of other areas. So there's a lot of discussion that happens uh on trade policy, but there's change happening in a lot of different places and a lot of different ways that could impact economic activity as well. You think about in the US, you have fiscal policy, you got the budget, you've got taxes, you got regulation. All those things matter. There are others. You have the geopolitical situation. You have in the Middle East. Uh I would hearken back to um TW when the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the impact that had particularly here in in Europe. Um so all those things actually can are are in play as well. And so we'll have to watch all of that to make sure that uh that I understand how it all fits together. you know, it's it's an interesting time in that there are so many dimensions changing at once that trying to really tease this out so that you know how all the moving parts fit together like a puzzle um is a challenge. And so I'll want to make sure that I have some confidence that I know for sure which direction the economy is going in uh and our mandates before uh really feeling comfortable that we should move. Now, two other things on this. Um so one part of this is born out of uh the experience that our institution had in the 1970s uh where we moved up a little bit then we moved down then we moved up then we moved down and what we learned from that episode was that um people don't like the Fed bouncing around a lot right it creates uncertainty about where the economy is going it it gives folks a bit of pause and then they're talking about inflation all the time and we really don't want that if we can help that. Um and then the second thing is um I think we actually have the uh some luxury to be patient because uh labor markets are actually quite solid in the US. Unemployment is not at a at a at a historically high level. It's actually at a historically low level. Um only the only lower period were in the years leading up to it where our unemployment rate was at levels didn't people didn't at one point think was attainable. Uh so because we don't have a crisis in our other mandate, it gives us some time I think to wait and see what's happening with inflation to be absolutely sure that it's moving toward our 2% target. I'll just ask one last question before I'll invite the audience to start asking your questions. Um I know coming into the FOMC meeting you said that you had uh a baseline forecast for one cut this year. Do you still maintain that? I'm still there. Okay. And what about for next year? Next year I think I have three cuts. But here's what I would say with the dot plot. Right. So, um, you have to pick something, right? And, and what we don't I mean, we do actually say how confident we are in parts of the SCP submission. If you look at that part, no one is confident, right? that that the the bands around whatever we're saying are really quite wide. And so you have to pick an outlook or scenario that you're going to tell. Uh but I think like in my view in our building um if I ask people how much would you be willing to to how many dinners would you pay for us to uh to on your outlook u nobody want to do that and I think I think you know we've been asking businesses as well like how confident are you with what your outlook was first we asked them okay you had an outlook on January 1 um is it the same outlook today nobody says this and then we ask what did you change it to and then they tell us and they say how confident are you and nobody has any confidence on it right what we know is that the environment in which all of us have been living has been just shifting day to day week to week uh which means that every outlook um I think people are articulating uh comes with very wide confidence I would you all have outlooks of your own I'm imagining and If we did that poll, I'm if I could ask you how confident you were, you know what your answers would be to that. And um I I'm guessing you're not outliers on this uh in any way. Hi. Um Chris Crow from from Capula. Um I wanted to ask you a little bit about about the fiscal policy outlook. I'm sure that you know you probably don't want to talk too directly about it because it's not the sort of Fed's mandate, but obviously it has implications for policy through the sort of impacts on the economy and um the yield curve. So, I was just wondering if you have any thoughts on a sort of the near what you anticipate to be the near-term impact of the um the policy package which is going through Congress right now and how that might impact the the outlook in the near term, but also whether um you think there are kind of heightened risks around um you know fiscal sustainability, the steep steepness of the curve because you know the large deficits which are being projected forward for a sort of long period So, um, I like the way you started the question. You you anticipated, uh, sort of where I'm going to land partially. So, we don't really comment on fiscal policy that that that's somebody else's in the government's opportunity and function, responsibility to do. Um, I we really take that as a given. I would say in this instance, um, there's still some question as to what the policies are going to look like that are pretty substantial. Uh, and so even there, I'm not I'm not sure I could do uh a fair handicapping of that. They're in negotiation as we speak for one side of the one chamber of the Congress. And then um, from what I've read, they're not really close in terms of the two pictures, in which case there's going to be a negotiation. We'll have to see how that comes out. Um the other part that I think is important to uh be mindful of is that um the packages the package proposals I've seen have some investments moving forward and some investments pulled back. Right? And then and so another thing that everyone will have to do is figure out what's the net of all of this uh in the aggregate and for particular regions and economies. Um, and given the scale of the bill, that could actually in its own right be quite a a complicated process. And so um once this is all done uh then we'll start to try to figure out the implications for various sectors in in our district and in in the country to try to have a sense of what the implication is then for our mandates which are um maximum employment. What's going to happen in labor markets as well as uh price stability? What's going to happen inflation? So it's a super comp you ask a super complicated question. Um, and we're still in process of just getting the um the actually the details like I think the details will actually matter a lot. Thank you very much uh for for what you've said so far. Um I would like to just ask a couple of things that follow up on some of the comments you made. one is in terms of the tariff pass through. Um some of your colleagues seem to be willing to say that maybe it's a little bit less pass through whereas I think the story you're telling is it's too complex to say that and it could be about timing. Is that would that be a fair representation of your view on the pass through of tariffs and what we've learned so far? And the second thing is you describe the labor market as strong but there are some indications of continued loosening and that perhaps that's accelerating. What is it that it would take to change your mind about that robustness of the mandate that allows you to be patient? All right. So the first question, so ask that one again. Just about the pass through of the tariffs. So the pass through. So um yeah. So you characterized my view correctly in the sense that I think there is actually more pricing to come and it is more a question of time of when and not if. Yeah. I I take this from a couple of sources. So, one, we do I hope you all are subscribed to the Atlanta Fed. Um, so you know, we do a bunch of surveys. Uh, and if you look at those surveys, uh, we get an unambiguous signal from whether it be CFOs or the businesses that the various other ones that their forward anticipation of what they're going to do with prices is increase them, right? And so uh and you know our folks in the survey center have have then done a little mapping to say okay when we ask you a year forward what actually happens and it tends to be spot on right and so we take that as a good indication that u today businesses really do ex intend to pass on the increased cost they face to uh the consumers and so so for me I think the other part that's been interesting is then we ask so when is this going to happen and that's when you get the three buckets, right? Then some will say, well, uh, we want to wait because we know it'll be more, but we don't know how much more. And some are have a view that, um, they when they increase the price, they want to do it one time. They don't want to start to do it in like little drips and drabs because they might upset their customers, right? And so that becomes a harder thing to articulate. So that's why some are going to wait and others are going to pass that on. Um and so so so that then me brings in the timing element to this and to the extent that um today we don't have a resolved tariff regime for our country. We have many bilateral negotiations going on um it's hard to know what you would raise it to until you know what the tariff is. So there's math to this that they can't do. Uh and so that that's um just you know one one reality of of where we are on that. All right. Now your second question. the labor market. Oh, the labor market. Okay. So, when when I think about the labor market, um I actually think about it when I started at the vid in a little long time ago. We don't have to call out numbers. And I I I would say uh in those days, the natural rate of unemployment was thought to be I think two and a half percentage points higher than what it is today. All right? And so if you're standing at 4% on a historical level, like that's a really really solid labor market. Now the thing that um sort of makes it more difficult is that we have recent memory, right? And we know that the labor markets have been even tighter than they are today uh through the early part of the t pandemic and even at the end of just before the pandemic, labor markets were incredibly tight. Um when we talked to businesses then they were painfully tight, right? It was go sort of beyond sort of a reasonable functioning labor market. It was an incredibly difficult labor market to which to do business. And you'll recall during the pandemic um firms were actually doing things to retain their workers because they felt if they had a vacancy they would struggle to find anyone who would apply that had comparable skills or qualities. Right? So that is the context that we were weakening from. So we're weakening from a hyper tight and strong labor market to one that is strong solid. U but I think having sort of longer historical context would suggest that um the levels that we're talking about now are not screaming red flashing red any anything like that but rather suggest that um it's solid but it's not as tight as it used to be. And then the other thing that we do is um we really do try like every meeting I have with a business person or or a chamber of commerce or anybody I do hand polls um and one question I ask is how many people are looking to hire you have one extra work would you hire them today almost no hands go up. Um, if I ask if you were oppressed, how many would have plans to lay off a lot of people? No hands go up or very few hands go up. Everybody today is at a very stable level. They feel like um this is like a growth generalization I would say, but uh there's nothing extraordinary in terms of uh strategies or plans around uh the workforce that we're hearing from any of our contacts. um which gives some comfort that there's not a cliff that's here next week where we're going to wind up seeing labor markets uh become incredibly loose. And so I think the context plus the forward-looking signals that we're getting from uh the folks that we talked to suggest that things are things may ease a little bit but um today there's not an expectation that there's going to be a dramatic weakening such that you'll see unemployment rates spike and and have people feel like there's um there's real risk. I think he also asked what what would change your mind on that? What would you be hearing or data? Oh, if if I got a lot of hands saying we're gonna lay off a bunch of people, like that, that would be one. I think I I would also start to um uh get concerned if I was hearing that businesses start were starting to have concerns about the robustness of their their consumers or their customers. That's also another thing that we're not hearing today. So, um so there's not today a sign of of a significant retrenchment that would suggest a dramatic slowdown or contraction of the economy. Kar Sean uh I guess just on the application front as you said like it's going to be very continuous till end of possibly to 26 what will be the threshold to decide actually that the price increases we're seeing will not have second round impact is how the consumer will adjust most forecasters have like sequential measures peing around late summer would you say that's enough time to actually decide to take a firm view on the second draws there. So, it depends. I like I don't like to get it depends answered, but this one it actually does depend in the sense of um like a lot is going to happen. We will learn about I'm presuming we'll learn about how some of these tariff negotiations are resolved. We'll get some of the details of what that looks like uh and what the the um settled upon tariff rates wind up being um with those sorts of things. Then uh then we can actually have a different kind of conversation with businesses because then you can do math, right? You can start to get a sense of oh well this is going to be a big impact. This is going to be a moderate size impact or a small impact. Uh and then that then we can like fold into a projection of where inflation is likely to go um and get a better sense of whether it's going to um spiral away from our target, stay basically the same or even maybe continue on its path. But but that's really the question that I'm trying to to understand. Our team is working to get uh insights on. Um and and today I will say we had lots of arguments in the building, right? You know, I like to uh encourage my staff to tell me exactly what they think. Uh and they have obliged me on a regular basis. Uh and um there are some who think we are headed for a crisis already like like the writing's on the wall. This guy's done done. And there are others who uh to your to your point are saying well businesses are really trying to figure things out. They're going to make it through and it's going to be rel relatively benign. Uh, and so we run the we run the gamut in our building. I think you talked to 10 people, you're going to hear a little bit of all of that at some point. There is one thing that I didn't mention earlier that I I should which is that uh one thing that we've noticed is a shift in the sentiment around performance where um our sense is that the business community has uh downgraded the possibility of the doomsday uh trade uh impact right that that has the the probability attached to that has gone way down um which has been an interesting a notable thing that we've noticed in the last really last four or five weeks. It's been been quite interesting that way. Just just a quick follow like are you seeing throughout your context like any signs that companies are looking for opportunistics for price hikes just environment? Absolutely. So um what do you think there would be for the second? What what's the time like you historically speaking? Well, they're doing it now. Um um yeah, historically it's hard because we don't have a lot of episodes of this. Um but um those plants are already in train. So we know that um even even in our surveys uh that um businesses are sensitive to whether their competitors are subject to tariffs or not. uh and to the extent that they are um they're signaling a higher um expected increase than they might have otherwise um even even when they're not subject to tariff they don't have the exposure right so you can have a you know a sector that's generally broadly exposed but you as your strategy may not be they are showing sensitivity to tariffs in terms of their pricing strategies um and that that goes both ways though which makes it more complicated in the sense that if you're in a sector that's not generally subject to tariffs, we're also seeing that if your strategy is subject to tariffs, you are more muted in terms of how you think about your price response, right? So, it goes in multiple dimensions and makes it very complex uh and hard to say definitively that it has it's going to be X or it's going to be Y. It's really this interaction and intersection and you kind of have to tease it all out and I haven't done that yet. If I can ask three quick questions, two of which might be somewhat cheeky and unfair. First on on immigration. Um that really seems to have slowed down. Um, so I wonder what what effect you think that is having on labor market and and on your own reaction function to how the labor market might evolve. Um secondly, uh if the president um intends to re-industrialize the US, then I suppose that implies that goods prices are going to have to be more inflationprone than services prices in order to send the right signal to the economy about how to rebalance. And that I guess is a reversal uh of what took place during the era of globalization where goods prices were dragging inflation down and services prices were high. So I wonder how you think about that trade-off in relative prices. And then thirdly um you mentioned the 1970s and um the president seems to be attacking the Fed um in ways that are somewhat reminiscent uh of of 70s and and 60s. Um, so I wonder, you know, what you think of that. Um, how how does that affect committee? Everyone's back up and say we shouldn't do anything. Um, you know, if you want to be, you know, if you can be want to be specific about shadow idea, the shadow chair, the shadow, the early nomination, any of these, you know, the nomination of somebody who who's definitely going to cut rates. So, which of those was the cheeky question? Um, I was thinking the latter two, but you call them all. So, um, all right. So, I'll I'll I'll talk about them sort of in reverse order. So, on the last last point, um, if you're going to be a central banker, you're going to be used to people complaining about you, right? You turn on any TV in any country at any time, if it's a business channel, someone is saying the central bank should be doing something other than what they're doing. If that's going to get you upset and worked up, you probably should do something else because that's it just comes with the territory. And so I tell the story, I was on a drug when I started. I was on a plane CNBC was on and they started talking about the Fed and I started yelling at the TV and uh never good to do on a plane. on the TV on the plane. Um, but it did cause me to have to reset and remind myself for what I was doing and that, you know, that that's just going to happen and and so I just got to do the job that I'm charged with and keep my head down, work on those things and do that and you know those things are going to be swirling around and that's just kind of what it is. So that's kind of how I approach it. you know, I think the chair basically says the same thing and um you know, it's just it's just what it is. Um the second was about goods prices versus goods prices. Yeah. So, so we definitely are paying attention to that. You know, one of the things that's been um the last six years uh we have basically been living in an economic period that doesn't have any kind of earlier precedent, right? And so all the models that you would ordinarily rely upon are not actually very useful because the dynamics are happening in a different way to the extent that there's a reversal or a um retrenchment away from globalization and such that goods are um produced in their lowest cost places or in the lowest cost ways. Um you would expect there to be um really some dynamic implications for pretty much every measure of economic performance including inflation. So, we definitely have to look at that. And, you know, it's one of those things that is um that is interesting because um we're all trained not to do these things, right? Like you're supposed to look through and look through and look through. Uh and yet the dynamics are such and they're playing out in ways that look through may not be the right answer. And so so being thoughtful and ever curious about whether the orthodoxy is applying here this time is something it's a lesson really I've taken from mo much of the last five or six years. It's it's just we're seeing unusual things and so unusual things can produce unusual things and that's just u part of the reality. Okay, your first question immigration. Immigration. So um we're looking at that as well. um you know um uh maximum employment is one of our measures. So how labor markets are playing out what I would say is uh um I'm not even going to say a number. I'm going say a couple things. Um one uh we have been asking um businesses that operate in sectors that we know uh employ larger percentages of immigrants uh and uh to say what's happening. Um for most of the last several months they've said things are fairly benign. Um now the uh the enforcement has become more aggressive in recent weeks and we'll just have to see if that sentiment of the nine persists. Uh I'm expecting there's going to be a an impact that shows up at some point. I just have to see how broad-based it is. There was a story in today's Wall Street Journal actually about some knock-on effects that fear is causing um some retail to happen less in certain places. Um right now that's I'm not hearing that that's widespread but this is a dynamic situation. It is evolving as we speak and we'll have to be mindful of that. Um the other thing that you said um actually maybe you didn't say it but I that's what I heard in my inside voice was um was this notion of immigrants more broadly filling a wider range of of uh occupations. So we know that a lot of uh innovation and a lot of patents in the US uh in recent years a large fraction have been uh immigrant driven uh as the US has been a a place of attraction for people seeking to do those things. Um and you know there's another article about um you think about academia uh other countries uh seeking to attract uh the scholars from prominent US universities uh with the idea that they might be more welcome there. Now whether those will succeed or not is an open question but it does then raise this question about what is labor going to look like? how is it going to play out and what are the implications for productivity and all those sorts of things. So we'll just have to keep an eye on that as well. Franches from capital. Um first of all let me thank you for the clarity and frankness. Um it's refreshing because we we sold a lot of u um thesis which u are not clearly playing out uh this year as expected. Um I have a question regarding well first of all let me let me just comment briefly on the last point you made uh over here in Europe we're actively trying to bring over talent particularly in the university spectrum and there are some fields reproductive health being one whole humanities where uh we think uh we think people can enjoy our European way of life and add to our productivity which has been somewhat lagging. But um that that's a long run question. Um more immediately though for for us looking at the business cycle I think one of the areas of uncertainty is around your reaction function and I think the way you couch the issue under two sides of the mandate with inflation taking time to manifest itself to the tariffs whereas the labor market being solid in a way but with low hiring in a way sets the scene for a situation and let me play out uh an example. In a month where uh the seasonals would tend to uh depress uh NFP count and there's no hiring, we can have a very low NFP print and the market may think gee this is you know there the market is slipping away from the Fed and so you have an acceleration of that pricing for you to cut. uh and so I just wanted to get a sense uh from you on on really what is your uh what are your weights on the on the reaction. Would you be be able when uh you know a circumstance like that uh comes across to say wait a minute I need three data points two three data points on the labor market to confirm that's the case and I want to see inflation or are the odds stacked in a in a quicker response. So you have this one dot and another way of asking the question is it a a place marker or is it uh something that because I've never seen a cut as a standalone you the journey come in two or three so back to you okay so that last little part went a different direction so um here's so one to to your your larger uh question. Uh, one point is not a trend, right? I'm going to want to make sure that we save a trend before we do anything, right? Um, so I got lots of folks in the building who try to drend that they got the seasonals to do all that stuff to try to make sure that we have the right signal from any data point. Um and even in that context because there's so much volatility because events are happening you know week to week um there's also this notion that um there can be idiosyncratic things that cause spikes or or drops and those things need to be taken into consideration as well. Um so so you know I'm trying to make sure that we are responding to signal and not the noise. And in this environment there's a lot of noise because there's just a lot going on. There's a lot of um reaction to things that are yet to come and as a consequence um they might change and so I want to I want to sort of guard against responding too vigorously to the wrong thing. Um then the dot plot. All right. So um the dot plot is not a decision document. It's not a a deliberation document. Each of us sends in our dots. They put them on the sheet. We don't talk to each other about them. There's none of that sort of stuff. And so um so I think the the um the things you can elicit from it and and the thing you mentioned about you know one cut isn't a trend right so we're forced to the structure of it requires you to talk about calendar year increments it doesn't talk about sort of an arc of policy right and so even the zeros might have an arc it just happens over a different time period and so part of um I think one reasons I'm in the middle because I think this arc is going to be extended and into 2026, right? And that clarity will only start to arrive toward the end of this year. Uh and then you only got so many meetings at the end of the year, right? So that that means you have one, but there will be more presumably once that movement happens. Um, the last thing I want to say on the dot plot, just so that everybody knows this, is that we we're not allowed to put no dots. Like you're not allowed to say I don't know, so I'm not putting in a dot. Like you you have to pick something and that something involves I'll say for me it involves me coming up with a narrative about what I think is going to happen. Uh but it can also be the case that while that might be the most likely narrative, it might not be a most likely narrative, right? That you there could be low probability assigned to all of these possible outcomes and this one is they everyone is five and then one is seven. The seven% is the one you're going to see, right? So, so there is this notion that there can still be considerable range around whatever point estimate that you see. Now the the dots that we did this last time, you know, they congregated, they clustered in two, right? The two and the zero. I think that gives you a sense of the range of views that the committee has and the um the reality that the outlooks are from pretty different places. You get a range of these outlooks that imply u particular action, but um they can move a lot. Like if if you looked at the projections for 2025, two years ago, they didn't look like this, right? And so it is definitely informed by data and uh this is really a point in time simple aggregation and uh phasing things out. So there there is um just to clarify about the dots there there is a fair amount of variation around how many cuts this year next year but uh everything is kind of going down toward the longer run dot I mean there's are we then to read into that a narrative that the baseline expectation is this wave of tariff driven inflation is is kind of not going to be persistent um not going to have any kind of lasting effects that we are able to weather this and and get back to normal. I mean, there are no dots going up, I guess. Yeah. So, I'm unc I'm uncomfortable trying to characterize um the full range like this is an aggregated picture that's done in a very mechanical way to elicit any kind of statement. I would say in my view I have confidence that um our institution can set a policy rate that can get inflation to 2%. Right? And so that's the longer arc is about for me is about what will it take to get us to our target. And I think that um we can do that with the information I have today without needing to increase rates. But I think that there is upside risk on that and things play out in a particular way. Um there may be a heightened pressure on price upward pressure on prices that may require us to raise rates or at least keep them at this level for a longer period than uh we might otherwise. And I think that's that's what animates sort of my approach today. I I I don't want to I I'm concerned that there we may uh witness uh a significant a sufficiently significant increase in pricing pressure that any kind of cut would exacerbate and make it harder to get us back down to our target. I'd like to avoid that to the extent that I can. Thank you. Thank thanks for your interesting remarks. Uh just following up on on on this point um in the past sort of you you mentioned at the the onset this notion of categorizing different you know price makers price takers uh when it comes to your interaction with the companies on the ground. Um so a couple of follow-ups on this in terms of the last six or eight weeks or whatever period of time you would be looking back at the different points in time you may have had interactions. Have you grown sort of more confident that in some particular areas there's going to be sizable path through? So I'm I'm focused more on the size of the path through. I think you've clearly elaborated a view that it's not about if but when. So I'm I'm trying to explore a little bit your confidence as to whether there is some element of anecdotes that have built up in the recent weeks on some particular sectors exposed to the the consumer as opposed to being in the you know producer wholesale sort of chain of of the value chain. So I'm going to answer this in two ways. So one um like my view doesn't really matter on this. I guess what the business leaders view is and what they've told me what they told me at the beginning of this year was whatever tariff they got they expected to fully pass it through. I know two c I guess one caveat on that. I think many of them had in mind magnitudes of tariffs similar to the last round of tariffs which is quite different than the magnitudes that have been proposed today. Right? Even at that point um many that we asked did say look we're going to try to pass through as much as we can. We're going to start at 100 and we're going to see. Uh and when we when we press them they're like oh yeah we we're pretty sure the customer can handle that. Now I'm not sure the customer can handle that. Right. And you know one question which is sort of to your point is like if there's a consumer re revolt like what happens to pricing and what does that mean for um how businesses will be able to perform and what does it mean for uh how businesses can retain a workforce right that that will have a significant implication. I actually think we're um this is another one of those periods we're about to learn something, right? So, it's been a long time in the United States since we've had a consumer base that experienced a period of high inflation, right? It just hasn't happened for a long time. Like there are many people who have no memory of a high inflation period and it's a it's a open question as to what that does to their sensitivity to price, right? It could be nothing, could be sort of snapped back to where you were before, but it could be something in which case you know that um that elasticity then could become material. And today we don't have the past experience to really measure that. This is something we'll have to monitor in real time to to get a sense of what's happening. And then um to make it even more complex, it may be um that the sensitivity is on essentials, eggs, meat, bread, but not on others or the other way around, right? So you have to start to think about what's the sectoral composition of these things and those sorts of issues. Um what we have seen consumers starting to do actually they've been doing this for a while is um they are trading down, right? So, uh, your moderate lower income folks, uh, they're not doing the the the label groceries anymore. They're going to the generics. Um, uh, they're buying types of product that you can ration. So, instead of doing, say, the pods for a washing machine, they're buying the powder or the liquid, so you can do half and do a whole load that way. But you're trying to stretch. you're starting to see that happen more robustly, which is definitely a sign that there is some sensitivity. Um, in our country, the lower and moderate income is a relatively small fraction of aggregate. So, we're starting to see this migrate up the income and wealth distribution. And then we'll have to see if they use the same strategies or not. So, so that's so that's the the the vector of assessment analysis that we're going to be paying attention to on this just to get a sense of um what the penetration of this these tariffs and costs can possibly be and then that'll have implications for a whole host of other things. If I may follow up just on the medium-term um comment, if you could elaborate a little bit on your assessment on the recent wage developments, which probably captures some of the more medium-term and moving away from the short-term noise uh that we've had and obviously your vectors to some of those metrics that you yourself produce. So be quite interested in there. Wages have been very interesting. They are they have returned basically to prepandemic levels, right? And that is um you know I for for a while I was calling that normalization right that's sort of returning sort of the way dynamics to parameters that are comparable to our historical experience uh and that's that was a positive right because what we saw in that historical time was um firms felt like they could produce at that they could pay wage to that level produce to get a decent wage continue to grow like like all that kind of stuff. Um and it was something that looked sustainable. Our our policies didn't have to push the economy. We didn't have to pull it back. Uh so to see normalization in some of these parameters uh was quite welcome. Um that has held today, right? And so to the earlier question about the solid labor market, like it's functioning in many regards like a labor market that can sustain it this without uh needing a lot of extra uh policy support. And then we'll just have to see if that that holds as the rest of this stuff plays out. Uh we've only got time for one more question. And also if Raphael wants to ask the audience a question, I'll give you a chance at the end. Thank you. Uh Gord Gam um thank you very much for the interesting um discussion. Um one question I just kind of ask is around the services side economy. Um so obviously with the recent revisions to the household spending data just mentioned earlier. Um I mean if you look at services spending now essentially kind of looks basically flat since January. So now looks kind of quite a quite a weak picture. Um similarly um some of the kind of recent weakness we've seen in the some of the inflation data has been kind of offset from offset on the services um side also been some kind of anecdotes things like beige book around softening services side economy um so I want to ask you firstly how much signal are you taking from that about the kind of underlying picture of activity and then secondly How much scope of offset do you see um for like basically services disinflation and kind of petroleum pressure on the good side? That's a good question. Um there like my head wants to go like seven different ways. So um I guess what I would say on the services um I'd say two things on this. So one, I do think that relative to where we've been in terms of uh the US consumer, there is more precaution and so um that could translate into um a less vigorous engagement and discretionary sorts of things which would which would show up in the services side. I do think um there is an international component to this. So, you know, a lot of services, you know, are by folks that don't live in our country. Uh, and um there's been um some energy in those places to not use those services. And so, um you know, there lots of stories you hear about Canadians not going to the US. U you hear lots about um some other countries uh nationals not going as well. Um those can make a difference. And in our district, you know, we got Florida. So, that's a lot of stuff that uh that people are paying attention to there. And we've heard from some that, you know, advanced bookings are down 20 25% in some instances, which is material. So, so I do think there is a bunch of that that's out there. Uh to what extent that will it translate into a full offset or like that's hard to say and that's another area where there's a lot of debate. uh some of the folks who um again I'll appeal to our building. So people feel like um you know everything sort of balances itself out this is going to lead to shifts that will sort of reduce the arrogate impact more broadly uh of the other pressures in ways that will just mute things. Others aren't buying that at all. So um this this is another one where we'll just have to wait and see how it plays out. you have any questions for our audience? So, I have so many questions um but they're not structured right now. Um I guess um so for your outlooks, how are you seeing um the playing out of these uh this this shifting trade policy environment? And I I guess I would say in terms of your expectation about um the baseline level of tariffs um do you think that they will be they will uh land at a level that will be material for pressure on prices and then the second thing is at what point do you think we'll have clarity? All right we'll just go around the room. So, so, so I do a so this is what in my class in my in my seminars or whatever, everybody answers. So, so we know we know because you know I'll just say this, everyone has a view, right? So, you're you're in the business, right? So, you can't do this business and not have an opinion. That's why our economists the same thing that really like to sit on the on the back of the wall and not say anything. We don't we don't really play that. All right. So, all right. So, we're just going to go around. So um level material benign and then when do we get clarity? I think they're going to be materially higher than they were and on the clarity I think it's a it's a long-term trend towards decline. So you're going to get so beyond 2025. Yeah. Okay. I think that um tariffs will probably end up somewhere around about where they sort of are now, maybe a bit higher. So obviously materially higher than than previously. That's going to have an impact on inflation. I don't think we'll ever get clarity. I think the guy who's in charge of this is in a TV show and he wants every episode to be as exciting as the last 10% I think it's going to be pretty much ball game ballpark figure that he's trying to play around anyway. Um, the benign not benign is going to depend. It's going to be different for every every country involved. So, I don't know if there's an answer to that one. And I agree with Chris. There's no clarity because it's going to be used as a tool or a weapon, whichever way you want to look at it. I'm going to plead the fifth as the organizer. [Laughter] I'm going to have to remember that. That's right. Yeah. materially higher is that we have a 15% average tariff the US and clarity is H1 next year. Yeah. Um high confidence are materially higher. Um and in terms of clarity again it's we know who's in charge and we know how he operates. We've seen it you know in his previous terms. So um even even H1 next year I'd be surprised if we knew what was going on. So um well I guess I'd like to ask clarification as to whether the materially higher is about prices or it's about tariffs. So I think I I agree with the Paris being maturely higher than year ago. Um you know on the forward basis where I may defer is on the m materially higher inflation dynamics and I I think that as much as there may be pricing power at this moment in time and you know I think I'd agree with some of the assessment you made about the notion that there is some pricing that's going to be passed on. I do think that if we decompose the whole value chain there are elements of absorptions that going to be sheltering somewhat the final uh you know and consumer and also think that there are major differences across sectors so the aggregate impact I think is still quite difficult to map out but there is some anecdotal evidence that is quite interesting at the sectoral level which helps you know giving a sense of the extent of the pathway in the near term um so that's where where I would land which is you know higher tariff obviously, but a pass through that's uh maybe not going to be um materially higher in terms of the persistence on on inflation uh six months out. Clarity. Yeah, I think clarity I think will come sooner rather than later. I think the I mean on this particular topic because I guess we'll have other topics to deal with the end of the year. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Very good. Um I I I I think substantially higher Um, I think it's a tool and a weapon. I think it's going to be much more varied by country. This already the case, right? China, you have very high on tariffs. Varied by country and varied by sector. So, it's a tool in that sense and a weapon. These would be China. Um, I think it'll have a persistent effect on inflation because I think this is not just a oneshot deal. I think um clarity uncertainty is a is a feature right not a bug. Yes. So I think uh yeah materially higher I mean we'd put it in the 15 to 18% sort of increase range. Um and I guess you know my view is that whether it's 15 or 18 is less important than the overall effect saying that we've only se seen historically very small increases in tariffs. This is much much larger in scale and so therefore anticipating the impact on the economy I think is difficult. I mean the impact on growth could be anywhere between one and 3% of things we think. Um so we won't get clarity on the policy because it will drag on in some cases and then there may come second bits of the cherry uh on the issue but in terms of the economic impact I would expect before the end of the year we'll know whether it's mainly inflation mainly growth and some combination I think around the same range for us but clarity maybe 2028 widening the band um I think in terms of where we And um I mean we calculated weighted average tariff around 15% currently still a significant rise relative to like the two and a half% you were last year and I think that it will have significant impacts on inflation and I do think it will have significant impacts on the growth side of the economy as well. Um I think in terms of where we land um I think there's a lot of moving parts. I think you could end up seeing kind of higher tariffs in certain regions. So so China I think potentially you could see them shipping higher again. obviously got the truce just now. I think there's also potential for more sectoral specific tariffs. Obviously got the ongoing section 232 investigations, the whole scope of tariffs that could potentially be added there. And then I think we focus a lot on the upside, but I think the other side I'm thinking about as well is the potential for the removal of some of these tariffs. Obviously, you've got the ongoing appeals court case and I I just in the back of my mind, I'm a little bit conscious of if you did see some of these tariffs ultimately being removed, then what other levers would be pulled? But in the baseline, I think you end up somewhere around where we are now because I do think it's not just um you know a a trade dynamic tool. I also think they want to use the revenue raiser. So I think there's a limit to how high they want to raise these tariffs because you don't want to destroy your tax base. So that's my sense on on tariffs, how I'm thinking about it. Um and in terms of when we get clarity, I just think it will be an ongoing rolling story. Um I don't think you get I'm done now. Yeah. I mean I I I also think that um probably ultimately settled somewhere close to where we currently are. Um in terms of kind of when we get clarity um I think macro uncertainty in terms of kind of like the overall level of the effective tariff rate I think will resolve relatively quickly within a couple months. um you know we'll know roughly within a plus or minus a few percentage points will settle but I think micro uncertainty in terms of what is the specific tower of this specific country this specific product um which is what matters for businesses I think that will take I mean I don't I don't think that go yeah so um on tariffs I think yeah 15% seems reasonable obviously we've seen higher rates threatened but really seems very clear to market that that was more of a negotiating tool rather than anything sustainable. Um with respect to prices, you know, I think there'll be less pass through than um others may anticipate and I think um actually the broader theme of deglobalization is the bigger inflationary theme there. Um with regards to clarity, I mean the way that I would look at it is more in terms of which are the important deals to do for the US. So Canada and Mexico, um, China obviously. Um, so all of those are kind of in play and then Japan and Europe. So I think once they've got those done, I think, you know, the administration will focus uh and pivot to other things that they want to achieve. So probably, you know, by the end of the year. Um, I agree on the clarity point. I guess the more important supply chain partners tariffs are sort of back there with the exception to the euro zone on the inflation side they tend to agree with that we'll see less path than currently feel just because of the randomized nature of tariffs it's almost like a randomiz cycle maybe that plays out sectorally anecdot point in that direction in terms of certainty I guess companies will time to tune out some of the tweets And that will help similar to like we had 25% tax. Um I think relative to this range I would uh put myself in um higher and longer. I think uh um for all the reasons said that uh we're looking at a materially higher effective tax rate uh tariff rate going forward and why longer I think for the particularly for the sectoral tariffs there could be some prisoner dilemma game going on particularly for the for the larger blogs I'm thinking about Euro zone and Japan um competing on the market. They have fiscal policy active now which wasn't the case previous cycles. So they could probably hold on to try to play the long game. Yeah, I think it the administration is aiming for which seems to be a you component of revenue raising 10% baseline tariffs and sort of strategic reshoring sectoral tariffs that level seems to be 25% um so one could calculate whatever average that gives I think that seems to be reason to way forward what I think complicates matter is that like once you get to that point, we still have not seen a single actual deal. We were supposed to have 90 and 90 days, we we we just about had the UK is done. And I think if you look at the structure of the UK deal, you know, quotas, really messy things that I think if you wanted to apply anything, anything like that for instance, how do you then go down German cars versus Italian and French cars, things like that. So I think from that perspective the US administration view of negotiations be quite simplexity of actual trade deals and so you might get a number and you might get some deals um but I think the uncertainty to an extent not as the peak in April but certainly higher than pre yes I think fairly higher but how depends on derivation of individual fields and that's not likely to be consistent across countries. So with Marcus like 5% uh and now clarity obviously is also a function of uh the aggregation of those deals. So if uh things settles some by the end of the summer in terms of deals then we might get more clarity towards the end of this year beginning of this year we see some pass through to inflation otherwise you know things start shifting around that baseline then it might clear of course we have to also say baseline beginning of next year if deals are settled but some yeah I tend to agree with what most have said I think somewhere in between 15 to 20 percentage points on the year. Um I think risk definitely skewed to the upside especially in the nearer term but I do think we've already moved past peak uncertainty. I think that was in April I think especially for the likes of the sectoral tariffs the 10% baseline or the China rates which I think are all aimed a little bit more at sort of income generation rather than as a negotiating tool. Um, so I think yeah, around 15 percentage points. I think by the end of the year we'll have a pretty good understanding of that. Our time is up. So, thank you Raphael so much for sharing your insights with us and thanks to everyone in the room for coming. Um, and thank you to our wider audience online. [Applause]