https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GBQnH5GMHrQ

2025 Financial Markets Conference: Keynote Discussion with Fed Presidents Daly and Hammack

Raphael Bostic

the Bank's annual Financial Markets Conference

May 20, 2025


[Music], [Music], [Music], [Music], [Music], [Music], hey, hey, hey, so good, good evening everyone. good evening everyone. good evening. thank you very much. it's really good to see you all. welcome back for, uh, our capstone keynote panel with me, Beth Hammock and Mary Dailyaly. you'll note that Mary is not in the room. um, she is still in San Francisco, but uh was uh gracious enough to still agree to to be on this panel. i'm really excited about that. want to also welcome folks that are watching by via liveream. uh, this uh should be a fun time, so I'm going to do some introductions and then we'll we'll get to the program. so Mary Daly is the president and CEO of the San Francisco Fed and she is a Fed veteran. before she was the president, she served as a research director at the bank, uh, and she started work there in 1996. uh, before that, Mary was an adviser to the Congressional Budget Office, the Social Security Administration, the Institute of Medicine and the Library of Congress, and she's also been a visiting professor at Cornell and the University of California at Davis. now, that's all pretty typical of a central banker, but some of you may not know that Mary dropped out of high school at the age of 15 and worked several jobs to help support her family. then she went on to earn her GED and begin her career in economics, and then she did all the stuff that I just described. it's really a remarkable background. so, Mary, thank you for joining us. my complete pleasure, thank you. uh, we are also joined by Beth Hammock, and Beth is a Fed newcomer. she was appointed the Cleveland Fed president just last year. she has 30 years of experience in finance, capital markets and risk management, so she's perfectly suited for the conference that we've just been experiencing. and just before joining the Fed, Beth was co-head of global financing at Goldman Sachs, where she was a member of the management committee, and Beth has also worked closely with the with US policy makers, as chair of the Treasury Borrowing Advisory Committee and as a member of the Financial Research Advisory Committee and the Treasury Market Practices Group. beth, welcome, it's really good to have you as well. thanks, so much thanks for having me. so, to kick off the the discussion tonight, um, I decided we're going to do this Atlanta style, and so one of the things that we do in Atlanta is we we like to ask our panelists, and actually we do this for all of our staffers on their very first day. we ask them to do three things. we say, um, tell us your name, tell us where you grew up and tell us an interesting fact about you that you don't think that people knew. so that's what we're going to do right now. um, so, Beth, we'll have you go first. i get to go first. um, I don't know that. it's an interesting fact. but my first job that I ever had was working in a video rental store back when those existed. it was not Blockbuster, um, and we. It was not Blockbuster, it was West Coast Video of Wayne, Pennsylvania, wow, um, but we did have a sign that said "Be kind". It's very important. you got to do that. it's very important. you definitely have to do that, so, thank you. so, Mary, what do you have for us? well, uh, I have. I have two things, Raphael, since you uh, actually started with my GED. first of all, you now know I have one, but I also still have their certificate. here it is. i used it, Oh, very nice, at a commencement speech I gave. but the other thing you may not know is that I like to weld, and I do welding as a hobby. i make sculptures, other things. i do not take commission pieces, so please don't ask me, but I do still enjoy it and do it regularly. well, that's fantastic, is there? do you have a website? we can see this stuff. no, I have a house. you're more than welcome to come to me, for all my friends and neighbors and anyone who comes to the house. if my wife hasn't already captured it, then it's, you can take it, and all I wish is that it has a happy home. well, I will make sure that, uh, that I come see those things when I next time in San Francisco. that'll be great. thank you, and I guess I have to do this too. um, you know, when we did the, the pre-, discussion, I told them I was going to ask the question, but then I I realized that, um, when we do this with our, with our staffers, when Cheryl and I meet our staffers on the first day, we participate as well, and we have a rule that you can't repeat an interesting fact. and so Cheryl is here. i should have had her sitting in the back so I couldn't see her scowl if I picked a bad one. um, but I'm going to say, um, when I was a child, I was actually a model for, um, some Plexiglass skateboards. so there's a photo shoot with me and my sister, uh, doing our skateboarding. um, at what age? i was like 11, oh my gosh. so I was like really young, and those were the days we had the big afro thing and, And I wish we could flash that up on the screen. i'd love to see that. yeah, okay, that's why we don't tell people what we're going to do beforehand, because we we don't want that to to happen. so so now I I think we're checked in. i think that's very good. so thank you for that. so let's start with just uh, some some of the process of doing uh monetary policy and preparing for that. so I know you both gather anecdotal information from business contacts. we do a lot of that at the Atlanta Fed and we found it to be incredibly valuable uh, but we all do it a kind of a different way and- and I'd love to just start with uh hearing from you about the value you see in gathering economic intelligence from the people who are actually out there making decisions and making the economy go and um, a particular viewpoint is: so: how do you think about that information in today's economic environment, where there's so much that's ambiguous, and why don't we, uh, why don't we start with you, Mary? absolutely so. you know- you mentioned that I've been working at the fed since 1996. six and one of the very first jobs I had at the Fed was to captain the beige book for the San Francisco contribution. and the beige book is just an element of all this anecdotal information that we collect and from an early time we started collating it in a way. we didn't have machine learning and and textual analysis, but we certainly had RAS and research assistants to comb through it and get out the key, uh, the key themes that were there. and then we we also put that with all the outreach we did, whether it's with our boards and councils that are formal, or with CEO roundtables or simply going out into the communities and sourcing information at gatherings. you know the. the president would give a speech and then I would go and talk to all the people at the, the dinner or the lunch, and ask questions and bring that back as economic intelligence. and the way we've always used it- and I think today is just an example of that- is you can't look only backwards and figure out where to go with policy, you have to look forward, and one of the things that our contacts tell us is not just what they did yesterday or even what they're doing today, but what their plans are going forward and whether uncertainty, like we have today, is making them a little more cautious but they're not stalled out, or whether they're stalled out and they're not moving. and I think that's the pieces of information that make it so critical- and you know I was. I was calculating this, Raphael, you may appreciate this. uh, you and Beth- together, the three of us in our districts- make up about 40% of the population in the United States. so you can see that we cover a big geographic territory just by going out and asking these questions. so that's exactly right, beth. Beth, how are you experiencing the uh intel from the field? yeah, it, we have a very similar process. we have a number of business councils that we meet with um on the FOMC cycle. we try to stay engaged with them in more casual ways. i go out and walk, you know, walk through the district, tour different facilities and plants and you know, sometimes when I go out and we have these meetings, we'll do a tour of a plant. we sit down and talk with management. we hear about, like Mary said how they're thinking about things, but sometimes we'll also have a lunch with the employees and understand their perspective and how they're seeing things, and I do find that the information, particularly right now, is really valuable. we take all of that data that we have in our beige book and we compile it into what we're calling source indices, um, which really tries to quantify all of it into diffusion indices about growth, employment, inflation, um. and what I find right now in talking to contacts is I really started asking them more very specific questions about: how are you changing your business? how are you, what decisions are you making today that are different from the than you would have made three or four months ago or you thought you were going to make three or four months ago? because I do find that that, with all of the ambiguity that's out there, um, it's really important to make sure that we're separating the emotion from the actual impact that's going to flow through in the numbers. both are important, but I think for the data and and positioning us on the forward, that's what, that's what's going to matter. yeah, well, I think that's exactly right. you know our bank. we actually have carved out a staff group that we call our regional economic information network, and their job is really just to go around and talk to people and do it in an unstructured way to really learn what's on their mind, what they're worrying about, how they might be thinking about reacting to it and responding to it. we've been doing that for a while. it's been super useful, uh. and then to your point, Beth: um, we're actually trying to be creative about how you compile this information. so we've actually started doing tech textual analyses, trying to apply AI and other methods to see if we can tease out patterns and how people are talking that might demonstrate important shifts, because, you know, the, the data that we all rely on it's backward-looking, is not going to show those changes for quite some time. so if there are ways to like identify that early, that can be super useful. and in today's environment, where there's so much change that's happening and it's unexpected change in in a lot of regards, uh, trying to just know where people are and how they're, uh, how they're thinking about, uh, what they might respond or react to is is super important. we we've been um experimenting with the machine learning as well on the textual analysis, and one of the things that I find really helpful is. it's a good check because you can read it and you take something away from what you read. but having that analytical check, when the machine goes through and counts up the number of times that people are worried about prices or other other pieces of it, helps to really make sure that you're listening and hearing the real messages that are out there, not just the most, because some of them are pretty as you get, as you both know, some of them are pretty punchy- the anecdotes that you get through these very punchy and you want to want to save those for the right moment. okay, so, so, um, so, okay. so we talked about how you collect the data. now let's talk a bit about sort of what that data has allowed you to think in terms of a policy stance. so, given all the ambiguity that's out there, all the, all the change, like, how do you think about your policy stance? and if you had to articulate a reaction function or an intellectual framework for moving forward, like, how would you do that, Beth? um, for me it's really about understanding where we are and where the economy is headed and trying to make sure that we are setting policy in a way that is supporting both sides of the mandate um, and that we're really taking into account a variety of factors, and so for me, it's about starting with the backward-looking data, understanding how we're entering a particular period, coupling that with the analysis, the stories, the conversations that we've had with um. you know board members, friends, frankly, people who are on. you know other nonprofit boards. I sit on hearing the different viewpoints there, and then I look at what's going on in the financial markets, and for me, looking at the financial markets- which is something I spent a lot of time doing in my prior life- is helpful because it does impact, or it can impact, households and businesses and how they're thinking about the decisions that they're going to make. and so, particularly when you look at things like the wealth effect, the stock market can have a big impact. now, you don't care about the stock market for the stock market's sake. you care about it in terms of. is that going to mean that a business owner, a small business owner, who's looking at their portfolio, might make a a lower investment in their business because they're more worried about where they are? and so it's really about that transmission mechanism into the real economy and trying to tease out those differences. and, Mary, what? what do you think about that? so you know it's interesting. i've been looking back, uh, on this and asking- because I get asked this question a lot and I go back to- okay, what is the reaction function? and, at a fundamental level, it doesn't change from period to period. i'm reacting to the incoming information and how. what my projection says is how close we're going to be to our goals now that. what really matters, though, and how you contextualize it to the moment, at least in this moment and all other moments I've been through- is you have to think about how far are you from your goals when you start and whether the sensitivities in the economy are higher or lower because of where you start. so, when we were locked down at the zero lower bound and inflation was running below 2%, we had a lot of room to wait, while the labor market went faster than we thought it could, because we didn't have the penalty of that boosting inflation. there wasn't that direct link that we were concerned about. now, with inflation already printing above target, and, having done so for a while, I'm highly sensitized to the idea that any increase in inflation or uncertainty about inflation could could cause that to be a stickier process. so I would say the reaction function stays the same and the weights on the incoming information, because of these sensitivities, change. ultimately, right now, the way I think of it is we could do scenarios, but there are never sufficient numbers of scenarios, all the permutations that could possibly happen, to cover the world. so then the best way we can communicate to the outside world, at least from my perspective, is to say: you know, look, we're watching the data and we have a little time to be patient because we've got policy in a good place. we're sort of in center position. so my reaction function is: stay in center position and then be prepared to move agile, but not abruptly or quickly, when we don't need to, because we don't have enough information to really bring those confidence bands in, and that's. that's sort of a longer answer than a simple reaction function one might want to write down, but I think ultimately it's the right one for today. well, I, you know, I think just both of you have talked a lot about context being very important and the idea that, uh, you need to understand how a particular data item or data point or policy proposal is going to be received by the agents in the marketplace. you know I was a psych major, an econ undergrad, and you know I've just really been almost beaten over the head with the reality that you know, most people do not have a utility function, that they tease out before they make every decision right, and that that there's a, there's a, a mindset or a, a feeling or an emotion that drives how much people will take on board things. and the art of policym is really figuring out how much that reality and those experiences should shape or cause you to, to move your projections away from what a model might say you want to do, because none of us is like- as much as I hate to say this, none of us is purely economic man, uh, and so we all need to be thinking about, sort of, where is the, the, the uh adjustment going to be made? and and that's, that's something that, um, that I know I've struggled with and I wrestle with with our team, and and the other thing I would say is, um, I've I've moved a lot more to crowd. sourcing. so, like in our bank, I try to get feed the the opinion of every economist and I want to hear them sort of in their unfiltered way, uh, because we have a lot of smart people who are all watching it right, they all have a view and and they I may miss something if I if I don't really try to tease that out- and that's been quite important, all right. so so, now that we've talked about framework and all that kind of stuff, let's talk about Outlook. and how are you thinking about, um, creating an outlook, like, like, do you have one? and, if so, um, how would you characterize it, beth? what do you, what would you, what would you say on that? so right now I'm operating in scenarios, um, I'm thinking about, kind of, the way things could unfold, and I think, as we get closer to the June meeting, I'll have to start putting you know stronger probabilities on each one of those scenarios so I can come up with an SCP and a modal outlook of of where I think things are headed. but it's great that I don't have to do that today, um, because I think there's still a lot of information and a lot of things that we will learn over the coming months before we get there. um, but for me, it's really about thinking about the, the significant amount of change that we've seen over the recent past, um, the strength that we have in the underlying data. we came into this period in a really good position, um, but the soft data that we've seen, the sentiment data, has been concerning in terms of where it's, where it's showing up now. that doesn't always necessarily translate into the hard data, uh, which is why I'm trying to think about, you know, three different scenarios. so for me, the three scenarios that I'm most focused on are one: if the tariffs that have been put in place are going to be a one-time price level move, if they're going to be reasonably static from here, and because they're you at the levels they are, that could weigh more on growth and have implications for the labor market, then it's pretty clear, as we start seeing that flow through in the data, what we need to do. on the other hand, if it's more inflationary, it's more persistent, um, because you've had this on off and and businesses are starting to layer it into their prices slowly, because they say, "Well, I need to add 5% to my prices today. it might ultimately be 5, 10, 20, 30%, but I want to start with something today, so I graduate". That could be more persistently inflationary, and one of the things that we've been hearing from our contacts is that they've worked so hard to build up their labor force over the past several years, they're very loathed to let them go and so they're going to hold on to them for a really long time. so if that's the case, then it could be that we need to stay at elevated rates for a longer period or, you know, think about further adjustments there. but if we're in this position where we're challenged on both the inflation side and the unemployment side, then that's going to be the really difficult place of figuring out by how much are we missing on each side of the mandate and what's the persistence of those misses. how long do we think each one is going to obtain to decide in what direction we need to shift policy? thank you, and uh, Mary, so you know, sorry, pardon me. so when I think about the outlook, you know, I think like all of both of you and all policy makers I'm I'm constantly thinking about the outlook and how it's evolving as I talk to people. but it doesn't make me data point dependent, because we don't have to really write down a number, like forecasters, private sector forecasters do, until we get to a point where we're doing the SCP, but we do have to have an outlook for the economy that we can update. and so for me, I've started with- uh, the thing that happens on every administration- i've worked at the Fed since 1996, been through a lot of changes: administration, every administration comes with legislative policies and those policies can often have supporting or offsetting effects. so the current administration came in with four major platforms: trade policy, immigration policy, tax policy, fiscal and then um deregulation. and so that tells me that we can have a net, net effect that we don't yet know, we've only we. trade policy was first a lot in the news because of the tariff announcements and the ongoing negotiations. then the fiscal situation has come more, become more visible and more important in terms of the conversation we've yet. we have some immigration policy, but so far not the big effects that we were many anticipated. and then finally, we have deregulation. so I think the outlook is fairly uncertain and it's why, being data dependent, sourcing our data through contacts, but also through the incoming information that's a leading indicator- is so important. so you know, I said, like all of us, I think we can put scenarios together, but the real issue for me is to keep my mind open that we don't actually know what the outcome will be. we don't know what the tariffs will end up being. we don't know then if, once the tariffs have come- so that's the scope, magnitude- what the timing will be. we then don't know how firms will respond. will they negotiate with their uh firms in other countries to try to split the cost difference? will they then pass parts of it along the production chain or will they pass it all along to consumers? none of that we know. we don't know if consumers are so exhausted at this point from persistent inflation that they can't pay it and so it's a volume loss. i think those are the kinds of things we have to think about. and the the information Beth said she's sourcing and Raphael, you mentioned you're sourcing, we're sourcing is critical. what are employers doing? are they stalling out their investment plans? are they they changing their hiring plans? are they keeping their employees or not, passing through prices or not? that's going to be critical. so right now, my o my, I have an open mind with uh, the ability, the willingness to move as the incoming information comes in. you know, I think in central banking you, you know you could face a situation where our goals are in trade-off. but you also know there's a lot of other op uh things that could happen, and you have to be prepared to move to either one or any of them as the data evolves. so it's a. it can be an unsatisfying answer because everybody wants precision, but if we had precision we wouldn't have uncertainty. so it's about just uh, keeping on, uh the open mind as we navigate through this. but my outlook isn't isn't gloomy at this point, it's just um thoughtful. so, yeah, I I would say I don't have a um a recession in my outlook today, but I think the question that I keep asking myself is: when will we be at a point when business leaders and consumers will feel comfortable enough to make the big investments that really drive sort of a lot of the aggregate economy and um so so my outlook is- is on, on some level, almost a u, a uh- an assessment of when I think that point will will be, or when we'll start to see elements that start to clear up. so, at the beginning of the year, um, you know, when I talk to businesses, they thought by this time of year there'd be clarity on a bunch of stuff, right, what the tariffs were going to look like. they'd have a sense of how immigration policy was going to be affecting their ability to build the workforce. um, they'd have a sense of some of the geopolitics sorting themselves out and they'd see sort of the, the broad contours of a deregulatory agenda, and start to see those things move. i think they they. what I've heard is they don't see that any of those has reached a cl, a point of clarity, and in fact, the things that have been the most high profile um, clarity is moving further into the future. if you think about trade policy, these 90-day mortoriia as negotiations are happening, uh, China got a 90-day with a different beginning point, so you're not going to have clarity there, uh, and that has caused me to really feel like we're going to see businesses and households wait. they're going to like go along as long as they can, but the, the big, bold investments in technologies or productivity enhancing things won't be here, and what that means is that we're going to not have a clear direction of how the economy is going to evolve. uh, and without that, I I think it's difficult to know how our policies should evolve. and and so are either of you trying to um handicap sort of the when we will get there, or or how are you thinking about, uh, the, the clouds of uncertainty that are out there, mary. so, Raphael, I'm happy to to offer something here. so I've been, as we all do, touring my district in terms of talking with people. so I was in Fairbanks, Alaska, and then was in Salt Lake City, and I just got back from Boise, Idaho, last week, and I've been crane counting and you know it's not a hobby, it's just counting cranes to see where the activity is. and it's not only the cranes that were there prior to the tariff announcements or other, the, the administration change. it's cranes that are going up and spades that are turning you know earth over, and and you're seeing new projects. and so I asked: why are you know what's going on? there's so much uncertainty, do you? why do you feel comfortable? and someone described it this way: there's, there's business that's ordinary and it just keeps going. it continues to go. i'm in a three to five year project plan, or I'm in a two to threeyear window of building this new building. so I'm going to continue to do that because the city's poised for growth. you know people are coming. this was in Boise, Idaho. there's a good reason for us to invest in our future. and then there's projects that are on the more risktaking or it. in order for those to pencil out, growth has to be X and the economy has to be ready today or in the next six months. and that was a real good, really important lesson for me is that the reason I think we're seeing some ongoing strength in the, or solidness in, the economy is because there is regular work to be done that pencils through any of these changes and you don't have to wait for clarity in order to keep moving. and then there's work that needs to that can only be done if we get that clarity. so it started helping me realize I don't have to put a number on when the clarity emerges in order for me to count the activities. and then I think one of the things I'm trying to do is unpack that: how much of activity that we're depending on for the economy to grow at a reasonable pace and the labor market to stay healthy, how much of that is already happening, or are we waiting for that clarity? because the clarity that I'm I'm not hearing much on the clarity side from my contacts, but I'm not hearing much on the stopping side either. so I would say two things on this. so one: we are also hearing that if a project is started, if a plan is in place, they got to keep doing it, like that's almost like some cost to just keep moving u, but they will at some point work their way through and be done. and so the question is sort of: what does that next thing look like? and and uh, that's the question I worry about because you know, Beth, you said this earlier- uh, coming into the year, the, the bones of the economy were sound, right, like like the, the, the fundamentals were, were solid. so working through these plans and projects is a continuation of that. i think that's one of the reasons why we've seen in the data, uh, some residual strength. uh, but at some point you need that next thing to start to move forward, and I think that that's something that I've definitely been um been focused on. so, so, Beth, I'll say- and just for folks in the audience here: uh, we uh are going to take questions, so I'm checking our board and we don't have any yet, uh, but if you do have a question, please do use the, the CNET app that you have for the program, and I just want to make sure we get you thinking on those things. um, so, Beth, you said earlier that, um, one of the scenarios that you have is one where we have the two sides of the dual mandate intention. uh, uh, can you take us through the way you're thinking about, like, what a thought process should look like? uh, if we're in that- and I- I know you said something in a speech like you'd rather be slow and move in the right direction than move quickly, and but then find out you've moved in the wrong direction- like like, walk us through your, your process there. yeah, I mean, for me, again, it's it's about understanding where we are, how things are moving, and I think Mary's exactly right in terms of there is some business that just needs to keep on happening right, and at some point, even though there is this great fog and there's all these clouds out there, businesses will have to make decisions and they'll have to move forward. they're going to have to make choices, and so we'll see that start playing through in the data. i don't know exactly when. to your question, my guess is it's going to take a bit more time, and so I think we are well positioned to be patient, and because I'm not really sure which way is going to be more impactful. i don't know which is going to be the bigger mess: on the employment side or on the inflation side. i do want to wait. i am a person of action. i think you know that about me. i'm always inclined to to do the thing. but right now, I think the best action we can take is to sit on our hands and really carefully go through the data, engage with our communities, hear what they're thinking about, hear about the choices that they're making and see how that all comes together in the aggregate data so that when we do have evidence of where we are, then we can make the right choices. and, Mary, so how? how would you think about sort of the, the tension that could arise? you know, I've- I have to say I've- get gotten a lot of questions on this and I've been thankful that over the last six or seven years they've not been intention by and large. um, this is one where I do think that you know we're seeing more people fear that that is the outcome we're going to get. like h, how would you talk about? uh, approaching that? well, when our goals are in conflict? I mean this is the. it's the worst position for central bankers, but I'm always also recognizing it's the worst position for the American people. so it's the people we serve are actually struggling if we get in a position where inflation is sprinting above target, and persistently so, and we have a weakening or softening of the labor market, that is, you know, moving us below full employment. so that's that's a hard position to be in, and we're always prepared to to manage in that situation by balancing the risks. so you have to take in the information: where do you think that we're missing the most on our target? how do we bring both of our targets closer to their goals without getting too far a field from one or the other? and we we can make those decisions as we go. i will say that this is one of the reasons that independence of the central bank is so important, because we have to make those decisions independent of considerations other than we have two goals- congress gave them to us and we have to balance them. right now, I don't see us in that position, though, as you've said, and I and I just want to reiterate- we could be in that position absolutely, but we could be in the other scenarios that that Beth marched through or any of the other ones that anyone in the audience can think of. there are many situations that don't look like trade-offs, that do follow what um economists love to call the divine coincidence, where you use one tool and you accomplish both of your goals. but we could be in that that awkward situation where that's not the case and ultimately then we just have to do the job we've been given as gently as we can to make sure we get to both of our our goals ultimately. i mean, people care a lot about inflation at this point, and they have been suffering from it for for quite a while. they sure do. and can I just add one more thing? i I would say the other, the other thing that gives me comfort is that we have seen inflation expectations stay reasonably well anchored, and that gives us the ability. i think that shows that the public has confidence in us and knows that we're focused on these dual mandate goals and know that we are going to do our best to deliver for them as we should. if we start to see that become unanchored, that would be more concerning and that might be a signal that we need to do something more urgently. but right now I do think we have a lot of time. well that I the expectations is is critical, and I talk about that pretty much every time I go out. all right, so we're at a financial markets conference, so let's talk a bit about some financial markets issues. so I'll start with you, Beth. you have, uh, a great background coming from from Goldman. um, there are numerous proposals floating around that would reshape the Treasury market and central clearing has been a very prominent one of those. um, now there have been fits and starts in moving that forward uh, but there seems to be uh a lot to recommend it. can you talk a little bit about what you think about central clearing and treasury markets, the pros, the cons, and where you think we should go? yeah, I, I'm, I'm, I'm very excited to see that uh, we've gotten a little bit more time before that's going to be implemented in the in the markets. there was a delay put in, so it'll be middle of next year that that central clearing will begin. um, I thought the discussions that we had yesterday and this morning were excellent in really working through a bunch of the issues and what's been happening in the treasuries market. obviously it's a it's a critically important market um for all, for all of the public. it really is the baseline rate against which all borrowings u and savings are are are measured. um for me, when I think about the move to central clearing, I think some of the pros and cons are on the on the pro side, I think you see the most benefits in the repo market, because the repo market is one that's a credit sensitive market. in the cash market those tend to be much quicker settling trades, and so you have a very short period of time where you have that, that exposure uh, where the trade hasn't been completed, and so I'm a little bit less convinced of what the benefits are in the cash market. but it may be that cash clearing is a necessary requirement to move towards the repo clearing, in which case I think it makes a lot of sense and I think it will help us. there was great conversation, I thought, today about the, the ceiling tools that we have, including the discount window and the standing repo facility, and making sure that those are as effective as possible as we're operating in this ample reserve regime, and for that I would think that as the market moves towards clearing, that might be something we should look at for our tools as well. all right, so my uh, iPad froze. so there are actually a lot of questions here that I didn't see until two seconds ago. so let let's just jump right into questions. um, this is my technology thing. it's the curse. if you've seen me often enough, you know this happens all the time. all right, so I'll start with. I'll start at the top, um, and this is uh, a um, a question about um scenarios, a couple of scenarios and, in fact, a proposal last week from uh former chair Ben Bernani to have the FOMC publish an in-depth economic review four times a year, which would include potential monetary policy reactions under multiple scenarios. like Mary, what do you make of that, that proposal, you know, without speaking of uh former chair Bernanki's proposal specifically, but I'll just speak in terms of communicating scenarios. it's interesting, you know, I was on the, I worked on a advisory board for the Social Security Administration and we took this on to think about: could we propose, could we publish scenarios instead of just the most likely case for the Social Security uh fund? could we publish scenarios? and so then we brought in, you know, groups of people to look through the scenarios, the public. they were highly um confused by the scenarios because we weren't as clear about the probability waitings on the scenarios, as they wanted us to be. so I think one thing we would have to think deeply about is, when you put out scenarios, then people look for the next piece, which is probability weightings on how likely you think they are. and ultimately, I go back to- I mean, I, I, I like the idea of sharing more information. it makes sense, but I'm also recognize that we have to go back to a fundamental question: what are we trying to accomplish? does do scenarios help if we have an equal weight on what, how they could evolve, or if we pick a modal one and then the tails evolve? does that find, does that make people feel confused? i really think we have to go back to. what are we trying to accomplish? um, I think of transparency as a complete, you know, open thought process, of everything we're thinking as not as helpful as a, as a a really well-reasoned. here's something if this extreme happens. here's something if this middle thing happens. here's something if this other tail risk happens. but then, of course, you have to help people understand the, the distribution of risks attached to those. so I guess I need to do more thinking about this. but we've been thinking about this as an FOMC, as you all know from reading minutes and transcripts, uh, for a while, and it's a hard thing to do. it makes a lot of sense in practice. but as Beth just walked through she's, she's got three scenarios that you started, Beth, I think, by saying these are my main scenarios, but then we can easily get to a place where we can think- and I'm sure you'll do this over dinner and drinks, uh, where there's other things that can fill in that fabric. so I'm just offering that it's a hard thing to do, even though I think it could be the right thing to do. i I think the conference at the end of last week was great in terms of just putting out some really provocative ideas and getting me to think differently about how can we communicate more effectively to the public, and I do think it would be helpful if we had some tools to do that. i think practically getting the committee to agree on one consensus forecast or even a couple of different scenarios is going to be really challenging, and I do worry that just putting out lots more information might not actually guide the public in the right way. to Mary's point: they may not be able to process it. they may not be able to understand it, um, and so it may actually leave them more confused than where we are. but I, but I am always open to ideas about how we can be more transparent in our process, because I think that's really important. i I I agree with both of that. um, uh, this is a really difficult thing. we want to make sure that the new information is actually information and not just stuff that adds just to the mix of things floating around. and when you have a committee of 19 people, uh, getting to one forecast that everyone would agree to speak to, I think is a huge challenge, and we'd have to figure out how to even talk about these things in in ways that would be useful. all right, um. so next question: we've- uh, we all have- offered reasons why it's valuable to wait until we have more information and uncertainty resolves. um, what developments could prompt you to act while uncertainty remains high, or are there any? i think, for me, there are moments when it's great to be preemptive and to be forward-looking in policy action. i think 2020 was a moment for that, where it was very clear that you were shutting down the economy in large part and that you were going to have, you know, major unemployment and major challenges from there. that, to me, is a great moment, when you know you can really be focused and take, take, you know, decisive action. while we have the uncertainty that we currently have, I I think it's very difficult. so I don't know that there is something amidst this uncertainty. my guess is, the longer that we live in this period of policy fluctuation- I guess I'll call it um- we will start to see businesses making decisions and that will flow through, and so it may still feel like you're at this high level of uncertainty, but underneath, businesses are going to continue to make choices and we'll see that flow through, and so that will be a signal for how they're handling it and how they will likely continue to handle it. at which point we could, we could- start to take appropriate action if we knew which way to go. all right, thank thanks, Beth mary. I'm going to go to a different question for you, because this is one I think is actually, uh, quite interesting. can you speak to the difficulties in the labor market for recent high school and college graduates? seek the folks that are seeking that. first rung on the ladder is the market for young people more frozen than for others. and can you contrast skilled trades versus English majors? sure, uh. so one of the things that. so I just was at uh in in Boisee, Idaho, giving a commencement speech at the College of Western Idaho, which is a a technical college that also has business, uh, granting programs, associates, degrees. one thing I learned while I was there is most of their students, the vast majority, have jobs coming out of their degree programs or their certificate programs. the issue is that they're having, they get jobs that might be, you know, a little bit below the first rung they thought they would grab, because the economy is slowing, the opportunities are are changing and firms are being more, more picky, and so the the main message is they have to keep going right. the career ladder might start a little lower than you thought, but yet you have to keep, you have to get on it and then keep moving yourself forward. i did hear, as I've heard across the, the 12th district, which is, you know, the nine western states- in case you're not a fed watcher of the map- but all, and they're just a very diverse set of states. that's why I bring it up that technical schools are graduate, are the the students who are getting technical trade uh skills- are doing better right out of the gate than the students who might have, you know, a more a general business degree, etc. where those employers are being a little more picky as they move forward about when they invest in a workforce, an expansion of their workforce. so that was you know. I still think it's a solid labor market. but when students compare it to a labor market from three years ago or four years ago when the labor market was clearly very frothy, I think they're feeling a little bit nervous and even disappointed. but there are jobs out there to be had. they're just not coming in the the flow that they once were and people have to be a little more patient in getting that and then a little more patient in getting that buildup on the early career. that's what I've been hearing and I'm seeing it in the, in the data as well. yeah, I mean, I would. I would agree with that. what we hear in the fourth district, which is all of Ohio, Western Pennsylvania, Eastern Kentucky and the northern panhandle of West Virginia, um, what we what we're hearing is that business services has been challenged, so graduates with English and other liberal arts type degrees are having a tougher time because you find that that business- professional services- has been slowing because they've seen their business slow. that's one place where things have been cut back. but in the more technical areas, people that are coming out from often community college certificate programs, um, even you know, vocational high school degrees, are doing really well and we've, we've spent some time- I was out in Lorraine County, um, where that community college, uh, LCCCC, has an amazing program where they have clean rooms and they're teaching kids how to actually operate in clean rooms, how to work on this, on this, you know really skilled technology, and when they leave, they leave automatically into jobs, but not just, as Mary says, that first rung job, but there's a plan for how they're going to complete their associates degree, a bachelor's degree, and all the job progression that comes with it. so we're trying to work within the region to find those types of opportunities, those types of programs and try to amplify them. and I actually spoke at a Augusta Technical College graduation last year, not this year- and to just see the diversity of degrees that they have and all of them going to jobs that have career ladders, it was actually quite inspiring, um, so there there is a, there is a future out there. i think you know, last night we were talking about AI- uh, and its ability and potential to potentially disrupt different parts of the workforce, uh, and, and job categories- um, we will have to watch that moving forward and I think that it'll be an important thing, but a lot of these technical jobs, I think, are going to be resilient in that, in the face of that, which should be quite interesting. and can I just give a shout out to one tool that we've developed alongside the Philly Fed, which is called the Occupational Mobility Explorer, which actually allows both individuals and businesses to look at what you know in their region, in their area, what jobs they the skills that they have, they're eligible for or should be thinking about, and the progression that they can look at. so there are tools out there and resources to help people find their way and find that path. it also helps employers to figure out how should they be marketing opportunities, what areas should they be looking for, new employees- so great, great work that's being done out there. that's very good. well, we have 90 seconds left, um, 90 seconds, wow, okay. well, I was told: look, dinner is. we're at the last thing before dinner and it's 7:45 and we're supposed to get out at 7:45. so, um, I will ask this question, um, and I'll open it up to whichever of you would like to answer. what are the conditions in which a central bank should intervene to stabilize government bond markets? that's a great question, Raphael. um, should should I go to? Should I go to another question? no, I, uncertainty, i'd love to say. if Beth wants to answer the government buying question, okay, i, I, I will. I will take this question because I was a market participant for a lot of years and I will tell you that market participants are prone to see volatility and to see a change in liquidity and immediately say, oh my god, the Fed needs to get involved. um, if you looked at what happened in August, August 5th of last year, when the Japanese markets had a big wobble, there were plenty of people who said the Fed needs to get involved. i think there has to be an incredibly high bar for us to intervene in the markets. it needs to be a level of dysfunction where participants um are unable to conduct business, banks are unable to lend credit because, again, our role is not to focus on the financial markets, it's to focus on the real economy, and so when we need to help support the financial markets is when there can be meaningful transmission into that real economy, and to me, that that's where that bar is. well, you answered and countdown 2110 right, so we are done. can you please join me in thanking uh my colleagues for a great discussion and you [Applause]. and now I will call up our research director, Paula Takach, for some closing remarks. well, thank you all. that was a lot of fun uh, and I didn't hear uncertainty too many times during that presentation, so, uh, that was also fun uh. so I'd like to just briefly close out the conference, um in a spirit of appreciation and gratitude. for me, the last two days have been full of really insightful discussions, thoughtprovoking presentations and meaningful connections, and I I really hope that all of you have experienced the same thing. and I think we all know that was not be possible without uh the collective uh effort and enthusiasm and engagement uh by a lot of different groups of people. so first, uh, I would like, on behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, to express our appreciation to all of the speakers for bringing their expertise uh their engagement up to the discussions on the panels, uh to educating all of us. i think we have an awful lot to take home with us uh, including our esteemed panel of presidents here, which gave us a lot to think about uh as we uh begin to prep them for the next FOMC meeting. so if you would join me in a round of applause for all our speakers. secondly, I'd like to thank all of you here in the room. our conference would not be what it is uh these discussions and meaningful interactions, without all of you putting your questions in C vent, presenting them to the panels, challenging each other uh and engaging outside of our conference sessions and again taking back what you've learned uh to uh interact both with us and and with your colleagues and stakeholders uh as you move forward. so again, thank you all. on behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, we um we're very, very grateful uh for your attendance here and your participation. also, I would like uh to make sure that we recognize all the folks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta uh that made this possible behind the scenes. um. so first I'm going to start with the planning committee. these are folks from our research department, economists, who put together this wonderful program um and and sought out each of you expert uh speakers and panelists, and um responded uh to all kinds of inquiries to curate what was really a wonderful program. so, um, I'm going to, I'm going to shout out some names here and if folks, if you are so inclined, please stand up to be recognized uh, Mark Jensen, Chamilleia, Manu, Chris Gerardi, Nikolai Gaspadov, Brian Robertson and Larry Wall- well done. secondly, we've also, um are incredibly grateful to the folks behind the scenes who pulled off all of the AV, the tech, the law enforcement, the events management, the wonderful food on the tables, the moving, the reception inside the other night when it was very, very hot. um, they've done amazing work, not only on site but quite honestly, for the last year, and they will continue to do so, already prepping for next year, starting tomorrow, uh, so I would like to thank all of our staff from the Jacksonville branch and the photo reserve Bank of Atlanta for their help. and finally, uh, I know many of you who are on the program have interacted with our conference coordinators uh and many of you participants in the room as well. things related to travel organization, uh, prep calls, uh, all manner of logistical uh things, and so I really want to, I really want to call them out specifically. they are our uh primary cat herders, our problem solvers, uh, our magicians in some cases. uh, and those folks are Sandra Gazone Kimzy and Jenny Kater. so thank you so much. ladies really appreciate it awesome. okay, some logistical things that I've been asked to to get across. tomorrow, breakfast will be served from 6:00 to 10:00 am. shuttles to the airport are available at 4 am. uh, see the registration desk if you would like to sign up. we would love to get your feedback on the conference and ideas for next year. there is a survey in your app. uh, in the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, we have uh a tradition of having a closeout question in our meetings, and oftentimes we ask uh every day on the regular meeting participants to say: you know, what did you notice during this meeting? and so I ask you, as you think about responding to the survey, what did you notice here? what did you particularly appreciate? what might be different about this conference that you would really like uh to see continue? what are some suggestions for improvements that we could do to make this an even better experience for you uh as our audience? and then uh, last but not least, next year. please put it on your calendars. we will be reconvening here uh May 17th to 20th for our 30th financial markets conference, so we look forward to seeing all of you back again next year. thank you, [Music].
